\n\nDECLARATION OF JUDGE BUERGENTHAL

\n\n1. Since I believe that the Court should have exercised its discretion 
and declined to render the requested advisory opinion, 1 dissent from its 
decision to hear the case. My negative votes with regard to the remaining 
items of the dispositif should not be seen as reflecting my view that the 
construction of the wall by lsrael on the Occupied Palestinian Territory 
does not raise serious questions as a matter of international law. I believe 
it does, and there is much in the Opinion with which I agree. However, I 
am compelled to vote against the Court's findings on the merits because 
the Court did not have before it the requisite factual bases for its 
sweeping findings; it should therefore have declined to hear the case. In 
reaching this conclusion, I am guided by what the Court said in Western 
Sahara, where it emphasized that the critical question in determining 
whether or not to exercise its discretion in acting on an advisory opinion 
request is

\n\nwhether the Court has before it sufficient information and evidence 
to enable it to arrive at a judicial conclusion upon any disputed 
questions of fact the determination of which is necessary for it to 
give an opinion in conditions compatible with its judicial character 
(Western Sahara, Advisory Opinion, I.C.J. Reports 1975, pp. 28-29, 
para. 46). 

\n\nIn my view, the absence in this case of the requisite information and 
evidence vitiates the Court's findings on the merits.

\n\n2. I share the Court's conclusion that international humanitarian law, 
including the Fourth Geneva Convention, and international human rights 
law are applicable to the Occupied Palestinian Territory and must there 
be faithfully complied with by Israel. I accept that the wall is causing 
deplorable suffering to many Palestinians living in that territory. In this 
connection, I agree that the means used to defend against terrorism must 
conform to all applicable rules of international law and that a State 
which is the victim of terrorism may not defend itself against this scourge 
by resorting to measures international law prohibits.

\n\n3. It may well be, and I am prepared to assume it, that on a thorough 
analysis of all relevant facts, a finding could well be made that some or 
even all segments of the wall being constructed by Israel on the Occupied 
Palestinian Territory violate international law (see para. 10 below). But 
to reach that conclusion with regard to the wall as a whole without
having before it or seeking to ascertain al1 relevant facts bearing directly 
on issues of Israel's legitimate right of self-defence, military necessity 
and security needs, given the repeated deadly terrorist attacks in and upon 
Israel proper coming from the Occupied Palestinian Territory to which 
Israel has been and continues to be subjected, cannot be justified as a 
matter of law. The nature of these cross-Green Line attacks and their 
impact on Israel and its population are never really seriously examined 
by the Court, and the dossier provided the Court by the United Nations 
on which the Court to a large extent bases its findings barely touches on 
that subject. I am not suggesting that such an examination would relieve 
Israel of the charge that the wall it is building violates international law, 
either in whole or in part, only that without this examination the findings 
made are not legally well founded. In my view, the humanitarian needs of 
the Palestinian people would have been better served had the Court taken 
these considerations into account, for that would have given the Opinion 
the credibility I believe it lacks.

\n\n4. This is true with regard to the Court's sweeping conclusion that the 
wall as a whole, to the extent that it is constructed on the Occupied 
Palestinian Territory, violates international humanitarian law and 
international human rights law. It is equally true with regard to the finding 
that the construction of the wall severely impedes the exercise by the 
Palestinian people of its right to self-determination, and is therefore a 
breach of Israel's obligation to respect that right (para. 122). I accept 
that the Palestinian people have the right to self-determination and that 
it is entitled to be fully protected. But assuming without necessarily 
agreeing that this right is relevant to the case before us and that it is 
being violated, Israel's right to self-defence, if applicable and legitimately 
invoked, would nevertheless have to preclude any wrongfulness in this 
regard. See Article 21 of the International Law Commission's Articles 
on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts, which 
declares: The wrongfulness of an act of a State is precluded if the act 
constitutes a lawful measure of self-defence taken in conformity with 
the Charter of the United Nations.

\n\n5. Whether Israel's right of self-defence is in play in the instant case 
depends, in my opinion, on an examination of the nature and scope of 
the deadly terrorist attacks to which Israel proper is being subjected from 
across the Green Line and the extent to which the construction of the 
wall, in whole or in part, is a necessary and proportionate response to 
these attacks. As a matter of law, it is not inconceivable to me that some 
segments of the wall being constructed on Palestinian territory meet that 
test and that others do not. But to reach a conclusion either way, one has 
to examine the facts bearing on that issue with regard to the specific 
segments of the wall, their defensive needs and related topographical 
considerations. 
Since these facts are not before the Court, it is compelled to adopt the 
to me legally dubious conclusion that the right of legitimate or inherent 
self-defence is not applicable in the present case. The Court puts the 
matter as follows:

\n\nArticle 51 of the Charter ... recognizes the existence of an 
inherent right of self-defence in the case of armed attack by one 
State against another State. However, Israel does not claim that the 
attacks against it are imputable to a foreign State. 
The Court also notes that Israel exercises control in the Occupied 
Palestinian Territory and that, as Israel itself states, the threat which 
it regards as justifying the construction of the wall originates within, 
and not outside, that territory. The situation is thus different from 
that contemplated by Security Council resolutions 1368 (2001) and 
1373 (2001), and therefore Israel could not in any event invoke those 
resolutions in support of its claim to be exercising a right of 
self-defence. 
\n\nConsequently, the Court concludes that Article 51 of the Charter 
has no relevance in this case. (Para. 139.) 

\n\n6. There are two principal problems with this conclusion. The first is 
that the United Nations Charter, in affirming the inherent right of 
self-defence, does not make its exercise dependent upon an armed attack 
by another State, leaving aside for the moment the question whether 
Palestine, for purposes of this case, should not be and is not in fact being 
assimilated by the Court to a State. Article 51 of the Charter provides 
that Nothing in the present Charter shall impair the inherent right of 
individual or collective self-defence if an armed attack occurs against a 
Member of the United Nations .... Moreover, in the resolutions cited 
by the Court, the Security Council has made clear that international 
terrorism constitutes a threat to international peace and security while 
reaffirming the inherent right of individual or collective self-defence as 
recognized by the Charter of the United Nations as reiterated in 
resolution 1368 (2001) (Security Council resolution 1373 (2001)). In its 
resolution 1368 (2001), adopted only one day after the 11 September 2001 
attacks on the United States, the Security Council invokes the right of 
self-defence in calling on the international community to combat 
terrorism. In neither of these resolutions did the Security Council limit their 
application to terrorist attacks by State actors only, nor was an 
assumption to that effect implicit in these resolutions. In fact, the contrary 
appears to have been the case. (See Thomas Franck, Terrorism and the 
Right of Self-Defense, American Journal of International Law, Vol. 95, 
2001, pp. 839-840.)

\n\nSecond, Israel claims that it has a right to defend itself against terrorist 
attacks to which it is subjected on its territory from across the Green Line 
and that in doing so it is exercising its inherent right of self-defence. In 
assessing the legitimacy of this claim, it is irrelevant that Israel is alleged 
to exercise control in the Occupied Palestinian Territory - whatever the 
concept of control means given the attacks Israel is subjected from that 
territory - or that the attacks do not originate from outside the 
territory. For to the extent that the Green Line is accepted by the Court as 
delimiting the dividing line between Israel and the Occupied Palestinian 
Territory, to that extent the territory from which the attacks originate is 
not part of Israel proper. Attacks on Israel coming from across that line 
must therefore permit Israel to exercise its right of self-defence against 
such attacks, provided the measures it takes are otherwise consistent with 
the legitimate exercise of that right. To make that judgment, that is, to 
determine whether or not the construction of the wall, in whole or in 
part, by Israel meets that test, all relevant facts bearing on issues of 
necessity and proportionality must be analysed. The Court's formalistic 
approach to the right of self-defence enables it to avoid addressing the 
very issues that are at the heart of this case.

\n\n7. In summarizing its finding that the wall violates international 
humanitarian law and international human rights law, the Court has the 
following to Say: 

\n\nTo sum up, the Court, from the material available to it, is not 
convinced that the specific course Israel has chosen for the wall was 
necessary to attain its security objectives. The wall, along the route 
chosen, and its associated régime gravely infringe a number of rights 
of Palestinians residing in the territory occupied by Israel, and the 
infringements resulting from that route cannot be justified by 
military exigencies or by the requirements of national security or public 
order. The construction of such a wall accordingly constitutes 
breaches by Israel of various of its obligations under the applicable 
international humanitarian law and human rights instruments. 
(Para. 137.) 

\n\nThe Court supports this conclusion with extensive quotations of the 
relevant legal provisions and with evidence that relates to the suffering the 
wall has caused along some parts of its route. But in reaching this conclusion, 
the Court fails to address any facts or evidence specifically rebutting 
Israel's claim of military exigencies or requirements of national security.
It is true that in dealing with this subject the Court asserts that it 
draws on the factual summaries provided by the United Nations 
Secretary-General as well as some other United Nations reports. It is equally 
true, however, that the Court barely addresses the summaries of Israel's 
position on this subject that are attached to the Secretary-General's 
report and which contradict or cast doubt on the material the Court
claims to rely on. Instead, all we have from the Court is a description of 
the harm the wall is causing and a discussion of various provisions of 
international humanitarian law and human rights instruments followed 
by the conclusion that this law has been violated. Lacking is an examination 
of the facts that might show why the alleged defences of military 
exigencies, national security or public order are not applicable to the wall 
as a whole or to the individual segments of its route. The Court says that 
it is not convinced but it fails to demonstrate why it is not convinced, 
and that is why these conclusions are not convincing. 

\n\n8. It is true that some international humanitarian law provisions the 
Court cites admit of no exceptions based on military exigencies. Thus, 
Article 46 of the Hague Rules provides that private property must be 
respected and may not be confiscated. In the Summary of the legal 
position of the Government of Israel, Annex I to the report of the United 
Nations Secretary-General (A/ES-10/248, p. 8), the Secretary-General 
reports Israel's position on this subject in part as follows:

\n\nThe Government of Israel argues: there is no change in ownership 
of the land; compensation is available for use of land, crop yield 
or damage to the land; residents can petition the Supreme Court to 
halt or alter construction and there is no change in resident status.

\n\nThe Court fails to address these arguments. While these Israeli submissions 
are not necessarily determinative of the matter, they should 
have been dealt with by the Court and related to Israel's further claim 
that the wall is a temporary structure, which the Court takes note of as 
an assurance given by Israel (para. 121).

\n\n9. Paragraph 6 of Article 49 of the Fourth Geneva Convention also 
does not admit for exceptions on grounds of military or security exigencies. 
It provides that the Occupying Power shall not deport or transfer 
parts of its own civilian population into the territory it occupies. I agree 
that this provision applies to the Israeli settlements in the West Bank and 
that their existence violates Article 49, paragraph 6. It follows that the 
segments of the wall being built by Israel to protect the settlements are 
ipso facto in violation of international humanitarian law. Moreover, 
given the demonstrable great hardship to which the affected Palestinian 
population is being subjected in and around the enclaves created by those 
segments of the wall, I seriously doubt that the wall would here satisfy 
the proportionality requirement to qualify as a legitimate measure of 
self-defence.

\n\n10. A final word is in order regarding my position that the Court 
should have declined, in the exercise of its discretion, to hear this case. In 
this connection, it could be argued that the Court lacked many relevant 
facts bearing on Israel's construction of the wall because Israel failed to 
present them, and that the Court was therefore justified in relying almost 
exclusively on the United Nations reports submitted to it. This proposition 
would be valid if, instead of dealing with an advisory opinion 
request, the Court had before it a contentious case where each party has 
the burden of proving its claims. But that is not the rule applicable to 
advisory opinion proceedings which have no parties. Once the Court 
recognized that Israel's consent to these proceedings was not necessary 
since the case was not brought against it and Israel was not a party to it, 
Israel had no legal obligation to participate in these proceedings or to 
adduce evidence supporting its claim regarding the legality of the wall. 
While I have my own views on whether it was wise for Israel not to 
produce the requisite information, this is not an issue for me to decide. 
The fact remains that it did not have that obligation. The Court may 
therefore not draw any adverse evidentiary conclusions from Israel's 
failure to supply it or assume, without itself fully enquiring into the 
matter, that the information and evidence before it is sufficient to 
support each and every one of its sweeping legal conclusions. 



