"" 
43. It has been contended in the present proceedings, however, that the 
Court should decline to exercise its jurisdiction because of the presence of 
specific aspects of the General Assembly's request that would render the 
exercise of the Court's jurisdiction improper and inconsistent with the Court's 
judicial function.  

44. The Court has recalled many times in the past that Article 65, 
paragraph 1, of its Statute, which provides that "The Court may give an 
advisory opinion . . ." (emphasis added), should be interpreted to mean 
that the Court has a discretionary power to decline to give an advisory 
opinion even if the conditions of jurisdiction are met (Legality of the 
Threat or Use of' Nuclear Weapons, Advisory Opinion, I. C. J. Reports 
1996 (I), pp. 234-2115, para. 14). The Court however is mindful of the 
fact that its answer 'to a request for an advisory opinion "represents its 
participation in the activities of the Organization, and, in principle, 
should not be refuse"(Interpretation of Peace Treaties with Bulgaria, 
Hungary and Romania, First Phase, Advisory Opinion, I. C. J. Reports 
1950, p. 71 : see also.. for example, Difference Relating to Immunity from 
Legal Process of u Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human 
Rights, Advisory Opinion, I.C.J. Reports 1999 (I), pp. 78-79, para. 29.) 
Given its responsibilities as the "principal judicial organ of the United 
Nations" (Article 92 of the Charter), the Court should in principle not 
decline to give an advisory opinion. In accordance with its consistent 
jurisprudence, only ",compelling reasons" should lead the Court to refuse 
its opinion (Certain Expenses of the United Nations (Article 17, paragraph 2, 
of the Charter), Advisory Opinion, I. C. J. Reports 1962, p. 155; 
see also, for example:, Difference Relating to Immunity from Legal Process 
of a Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights, Advisory 
Opinion, I. C.J. Reports 1999 (I), pp. 78-79, para. 29.)  

The present Court has never, in the exercise of this discretionary 
power, declined to respond to a request for an advisory opinion. Its decision 
not to give the advisory opinion on the Legality of the Use by a 
State of Nuclear Weapons in Armed Conflict requested by the World 
Health Organization was based on the Court's lack of jurisdiction, and 
not on considerations of judicial propriety (see I. C. J. Reports 1996 (I), 
p. 235, para. 14). Only on one occasion did the Court's predecessor, the 
Permanent Court of International Justice, take the view that it should 


not reply to a question put to it (Status of Eastern Carelia, Advisory 
Opinion, 1923, P. C..I. J., Series B, No. 5), but this was due to 

"the very particular circumstances of the case, among which were 
that the question directly concerned an already existing dispute, one 
of the States parties to which was neither a party to the Statute of 
the Permanent Court nor a Member of the League of Nations, 
objected to the proceedings, and refused to take part in any way" 
(Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons, 1. C. J. Reports 
1996 (I), pp. 235-236, para. 14).


45. These considerations do not release the Court from the duty to satisfy 
itself, each time it is seised of a request for an opinion, as to the propriety of 
the exercise of its judicial function, by reference to the criterion of "compelling 
reasons" as cited above. The Court will accordingly examine in detail and in 
the light of its jurisprudence each of the arguments presented to it in this 
regard.  
46. The first such argument is to the effect that the Court should not 
exercise its jurisdiction in the present case because the request concerns a 
contentious matter between Israel and Palestine, in respect of which Israel has 
not consented to the exercise of  that jurisdiction. According to this view, the 
subject -matter of the question posed by the General Assembly "is an integral 
part of the wider Israeli -Palestinian dispute concerning questions of terrorism, 
security, borders, settlements, Jerusalem and other related matters". Israel has 
emphasized that i t has never consented to the settlement of this wider dispute 
by the Court or by any other means of compulsory adjudication; on the 
contrary, it contends that the parties repeatedly agreed that these issues are to 
be settled by negotiation, with the possibility of an agreement that recourse 
could be had to arbitration. It is accordingly contended that the Court should 
decline to give the present Opinion, on the basis inter alia of the precedent of 
the decision of the Permanent Court of International Justice  on the Status of 
Eastern Carelia.  
47. The Court observes that the lack of consent to the Court's contentious 
jurisdiction by interested States has no bearing on the Court's jurisdiction to 
give an advisory opinion. In an Advisory Opinion of 195(), the Court 
explained that:  
"The consent of States, parties to a dispute, is the basis of the Court's 
jurisdiction in contentious cases. The situation is different in regard to 
advisory proceedings even where the Request for an Opinion relates to a 
legal question actually pending bet ween States. The Court's reply is only 
of an advisory character: as such, it has no binding force. It follows that 
no State, whether a Member of the United Nations or not, can prevent the 
giving of an Advisory Opinion which the United Nations considers to be desirable
in order to obtain enlightenment as to the course of action it should take. The Court's 
Opinion is given not to the States, but to the organ which is entitled to 
request it ; the reply of the Court, itself an 'organ of the United Nations', 
represents its participation in the activities of the Organization, and, in 
principle, should not be refused." (Interpretation o/' Peace Treaties with 
Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania, First Phase, Advisory Opinion, I. C. J. 
Reports 195(), p. 71 ; see also Western Sahara, I. C'. J. Reports 1975, p. 
24, para. 31.)  
It followed from this that, in those proceedings, the Court did not refuse to 
respond to the request for an advisory opinion on the ground that, in the 
particular circumstances, it lacked jurisdiction. The Court did however 
examine the opposition of certain interested States to the request by the 
General Assembly in the context of issues of judicial propriety. Commenting 
on its 1950 decision, the Court explained in its Advisory Opinion on Western 
Sahara that it had "Thus ... recognized that lack of consent might constitute 
a ground for declining to give the opinion requested if, in the circumstances 
of a given case, considerations of judicial propriety should oblige the Court to 
refuse an opinion." The Court continued •  

In certain circumstances the lack of consent of an interested 
State may render the giving of an advisory opinion incompatible 
with the Court's judicial character. An instance of this would be 
when the circumstances disclose that to give a reply would have 
the effect of circumventing the principle that a State is not obliged 
to allow its disputes to be submitted to judicial settlement without 
its consent." ( Western Sahara, I. C. J. Reports 1975, p. 25, paras. 
32-33.) 
In applying that principle to the request concerning Western Sahara, the Court 
found that a legal controversy did indeed exist, but one which had arisen 
during the proceedings of the General Assembly and in relation to matters with 
which the Assembly was dealing. It had not arisen independently in bilateral 
relations (ibid., p. 25, para. 34).  
48. As regards the request for an advisory opinion now before it, the Court 
acknowledges that Israel and Palestine have expressed radically divergent 
views on the legal consequences of Israel's construction of the wall, on which 
the Court has been asked to pronounce. However, as the Court has itself noted, 
"Differences of views . on legal issues have existed in practically every 
advisory proceeding" (Legal Consequences for States of the Continued 
Presence of South Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding 
Security Council Resolution 276 (197()), Advisory Opinion, a C. J. Reports 
1971, p. 24, para. 34). 
 
49. Furthermore, the Court does not consider that the subject-matter  
of the General Assembly's request can be regarded as only a bilateral matter 
between Israel and Palestine. Given the powers and responsibilities of the 
United Nations in questions relating to international peace and security, it is 
the Court's view that the construction of the wall must be deemed to be directly 
of concern to the United Nations. The responsibility of the United Nations in 
this matter also has its origin in the Mandate and the Partition Resolution 
concerning Palestine (see paragraphs 70 and 7 1 below). This responsibility 
has been described by the General Assembly as "a permanent responsibility 
towards the question of Palestine until the question is resolved in all its aspects 
in a satisfactory manner in accordance with international legitimacy " (General 
Assembly resolution 57/107 of 3 December 2002). Within the institutional 
framework of the Organization, this responsibility has been manifested by the 
adoption of many Security Council and General Assembly resolutions, and by 
the creation of several subsidiary bodies specifically established to assist in 
the realization of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.  

50. The object of the request before the Court is to obtain from the Court 
an opinion which the General Assembly deems of assistance to it for the proper 
exercise of its functions. The opinion is requested on a question which is of 
particularly acute concern t o the United Nations, and one which is located in 
a much broader frame of reference than a bilateral dispute. In the 
circumstances, the Court does not consider that to give an opinion would have 
the effect of circumventing the principle of consent to judicial settlement, and 
the Court accordingly cannot, in the exercise of its discretion, decline to give 
an opinion on that ground.  
51. The Court now turns to another argument raised in the present 
proceedings in support of the view that it should decline to exercise its 
jurisdiction. Some participants have argued that an advisory opinion from the 
Court on the legality of the wall and the legal consequences of its construction 
could impede a political, negotiated solution 10 the Israeli -Palestinian conflict. 
More particularly, it has been contended that such an opinion could undermine 
the scheme of the "Roadmap" (see paragraph 22 above), which requires Israel 
and Palestine to comply with certain obligations in various phases referred to 
therein. The requested opinion, it has been alleged, could complicate the 
negotiations envisaged in the "Roadmap", and the Court should therefore 
exercise it s discretion and decline to reply to the question put.  
This is a submission of a kind which the Court has already had to consider 
several times in the past. For instance, in its Advisory Opinion on the Legality 
of the 7hreal or Use of Nuclear Weapons, the Court stated :  

"It has ... been submitted that a reply from the Court in this case might 
adversely affect disarmament negotiations and would, therefore, be 
contrary to the interest of the United Nations. The Court is aware that, no 
matter what might be its conclusions in any opinion it might give, they 
would have relevance for the continuing debate on the matter in the 
General Assembly and would present an additional element in the 
negotiations on the matter. Beyond that, the effect of the opinion is a 
matter of appreciation. The Court has heard contrary positions advanced 
and there are no evident criteria by which it can prefer one assessment to 
another." (I.C.J. Reports 1996 (I) , p. 237, para. 17; see also Western 
Sahara, I. C. J. Reports  
1975, p. 37, para. 73.)  
52. One participant in the present proceedings has indicated that the Court, 
if it were to give a response to the request, should in any event do so keeping 
in mind two key aspects of the peace process: the fundamental principle that 
permanent status issues must be resolved through negotiations; and the 
need during the interim period for the parties to fulfil their security 
responsibilities so that the peace process can succeed"  
53. The Court is conscious that the "Roadmap", which was endorsed by 
the Security Council in resolution 1515 (2003) (see paragraph 22 above), 
constitutes a negotiating framework for the resolution of the Israeli -Palestinian 
conflict. It is not clear, however,  what influence the Court's opinion might 
have on those negotiations: participants in the present proceedings have 
expressed differing views in this regard. The Court cannot regard this factor 
as a compelling reason to decline to exercise its jurisdiction.  
54. It was also put to the Court by certain participants that the question of 
the construction of the wall was only one aspect of the Israeli-Palestinian 
conflict, which could not be properly addressed in the present proceedings. 
The Court does not however consider this a reason for it to decline to reply to 
the question asked. The Court is indeed aware that the question of the wall is 
part of a greater whole, and it would take this circumstance carefully into 
account in any opinion it might give. At the same ti me, the question that the 
General Assembly has chosen to ask of the Court is confined to the legal 
consequences of the construction of the wall, and the Court would only 
examine other issues to the extent that they might be necessary to its 
consideration of the question put to it.  

55. Several participants in the proceedings have raised the further  
argument that the Court should decline to exercise its jurisdiction because it 
does not have at its disposal the requisite facts and evidence to enable it to 
reach its conclusions. In particular, Israel has contended, referring to the 
Advisory Opinion on t he Interpretation of Peace Treaties with Bulgaria, 
Hungary and Romania, that the Court could not give an opinion on issues 
which raise questions of fact that cannot be elucidated without hearing all 
parties to the conflict. According to Israel, if the Court decided to give the 
requested opinion, it would be forced to speculate about essential facts and 
make assumptions about arguments of law. More specifically, Israel has 
argued that the Court could not rule on the legal consequences of the 
construction of  the wall without enquiring, first, into the nature and scope of 
the security threat to which the wall is intended to respond and the 
effectiveness of that response, and, second, into the impact of the construction 
for the Palestinians. This task, which would already be difficult in a 
contentious case, would be further complicated in an advisory proceedings 
particularly since Israel alone possesses much of the necessary information 
and has stated that it chooses not to address the merits. Israel has concluded 
that the Court, confronted with factual issues impossible to clarify in the 
present proceedings, should use its discretion and decline to comply with the 
request for an advisory opinion. 


 
56. The Court observes that the question whether the evidence available 
to it is sufficient to give an advisory opinion must be decided in each particular 
instance. In its Opinion concerning the Interpretation of Peace Treaties with 
Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania (I. C. J. Reports 1950, p. 72) and again in its 
Opinion on the Western Sahara, the Court made it clear that what is decisive 
in these circumstances is  
"whether the Court has before it sufficient information and evidence to 
enable it to arrive at a judicial conclusion upon any disputed questions of 
fact the determination of which is necessary for it to give an opinion in 
conditions compatible with its judicial character (Western Sahara, I. C. 
J. Reports 1975, pp. 28 -29, para. 46).  
Thus, for instance, in the proceedings concerning the Status of Eastern Carelia, 
the Permanent Court of International Justice decided to decline to give an 
opinion inter alia because the question put "raised a question of fact which 
could not be elucidated without hearing both parties' (Interpretation of 
Peace Treaties With Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania, I.C.J. Reports 195(), p. 
72; see Status of Eastern Carelia, P. C.I. J. , Series B, No. 5, p. 28). the other 
hand, in the Western Sahara Opinion, the Court observed that it had been 
provided with very extensive documentary evidence of the relevant facts (I. 
C. J. Reports 1975, p. 29, para. 47).  

57. In the present instance, the Court has at its disposal the report of the 
Secretary -General, as well as a voluminous dossier submitted by him to the 
Court, comprising not only detailed information on the route or  
the wall but also on its humanitarian and socio -economic impact on the 
Palestinian population. The dossier includes several reports based on onsite 
visits by special rapporteurs and competent organs of the United Nations. The 
Secretary -General has further submitted to the Court a written statement 
updating his report, which supplemented the information contained therein. 
Moreover, numerous other participants have submitted to the Court written 
statements which contain information relevant to a response to t he question 
put by the General Assembly. The Court notes in particular that Israel's Written 
Statement, although limited to issues of jurisdiction and judicial propriety, 
contained observations on other matters, including Israel's concerns in terms 
of security, and was accompanied by corresponding annexes; many other 
documents issued by the Israeli Government on those matters are in the public 
domain.
  
58. The Court finds that it has before it sufficient information and 
evidence to enable it to give the advisory opinion requested by the General 
Assembly. Moreover, the circumstance that others may evaluate and interpret 
these facts in a subjective or political manner can be no argument for a court 
of law to abdicate its judicial task. There is therefore in the present case no 
lack of information such as to constitute a compelling reason for the Court to 
decline to give the requested opinion.  

59. In their written statements, some participants have also put forward 
the argument that the Court should decline to give the requested opinion on 
the legal consequences of the construction of the wall because such opinion 
would lack any useful purpose. They  have argued that the advisory opinions 
of' the Court are to be seen as a means to enable an organ or agency in need of 
legal clarification for its future action to obtain that clarification. In the present 
instance, the argument continues, the General Assembly would not need an 
opinion of the Court because it has already declared the construction of the 
wall to be illegal and has already determined the legal consequences by 
demanding that Israel stop and reverse its construction, and further, because 
the General Assembly has never made it clear how it intended to use the 
opinion.  
60. As is clear from the Court's jurisprudence, advisory opinions have the 
purpose of furnishing to the requesting organs the elements of law necessary 
for them in their action. In its Opinion concerning Reservations to the 
Convention on the Prevention an d Punishment of the Crime o/' Genocide, the 
Court observed: "The object of this request for an Opinion is to guide the 
United Nations in respect of its own action." (I. C J. Reports 1951, p. 19.) 
Likewise, in its Opinion on the Legal Consequences  /0r Sta tes o/' the 
Continued Presence South Africa in Namibia (South  West Africa) 
notwithstanding Security Council Resolution 276 (1970), the 
Court noted: "The request is put forward by a United Nations organ with 
reference to its own decisions and it seeks legal advice from the Court on the 
consequences and implications of  these decisions." (I. C.J. Reports 1971, p. 
24, para. 32.) The Court found on another occasion that the advisory opinion 
it was to give would "furnish the General Assembly with elements of a legal 
character relevant to its further treatment of the decolonization of Western 
Sahara" ( Western Sahara, I. C. J. Reports 1975, p. 37, para. 72).  

61. With regard to the argument that the General Assembly has not made 
it clear what use it would make of an advisory opinion on the wall, the Court 
would recall, as equally relevant in the present proceedings, what it stated in 
its Opinion on the Legality' of  the Threat or Use Q/• Nuclear Weapons :  
"Certain States have observed that the General Assembly has not 
explained to the Court for what precise purposes it seeks the advisory 
opinion. Nevertheless, it is not for the Court itself to purport to decide 
whether or not an advisory opinion is needed b y the Assembly for the 
performance of its functions. The General Assembly has the right to 
decide for itself on the usefulness of an opinion in the light of its own 
needs." (I. C. J. Reports 1996 (I), p. 237, para. 16.)  

62. It follows that the Court cannot decline to answer the question posed 
based on the ground that its opinion would lack any useful purpose. The 
Court cannot substitute its assessment of the usefulness of the opinion 
requested for that of the organ that seeks  such opinion, namely the General 
Assembly. Furthermore, and in any event, the Court considers that the 
General Assembly has not yet determined all the possible consequences of its 
own resolution. The Court's task would be to determine in a comprehensive 
manner the legal consequences of the construction of the wall, while the 
General Assembly and the Security Council  may then draw conclusions 
from the Court's findings.  

63. Lastly, the Court will turn to another argument advanced with regard 
to the propriety of its giving an advisory opinion in the present proceedings. 
Israel has contended that Palestine, given its responsibility for acts of 
violence against Israel and its population which the wall is aimed at 
addressing, cannot seek from the Court a remedy for a situation resulting 
from its own wrongdoing. In this context, Israel has invoked the maxim 
nullus commodum capere potest de sua injuria propria, which it considers to  
be as relevant in advisory proceedings as it is in contentious cases. Therefore, 
Israel concludes, good faith and the principle of "clean hands" provide a 
compelling reason that should lead the Court to refuse the General 
Assembly's request.  

64. The Court does not consider this argument to be pertinent. As was 
emphasized earlier, it was the General Assembly which requested the 
advisory opinion, and the opinion is to be given to the General Assembly, and 
not to a specific State or entity.  
65. In the light of the foregoing, the Court concludes not only that it has 
jurisdiction to give an opinion on the question put to it by the General 
Assembly (see paragraph 42 above), but also that there is no compelling 
reason for it to use its discretionary power not to give that opinion.   
""
