\n\nSEPARATE OPINION OF JUDGE OWADA 

\n\n1. i concur with the conclusions of the Opinion of the Court both on 
the preliminary issues (jurisdiction and judicial propriety) and on most 
of the points belonging to the merits of the substantive issues involved. 
Nevertheless, not only have i some disagreements on certain specific 
points in the Opinion, but i have some serious reservations about the 
way the Court has proceeded in this case. While i acknowledge that 
the way in which the Court has proceeded with the present case has to a 
large extent been made inevitable under the somewhat extraordinary and 
unique circumstances of the case that are not always attributable to 
the responsibility of the Court, i feel it incumbent upon me to make 
my position clear, by pointing to some of the problematic aspects of the 
way in which the Court has proceeded in the present case. 

\n\n2. The Court has reached its conclusions on the preliminary issues on 
jurisdiction and on judicial propriety of exercising this jurisdiction 
primarily on the basis of the statements put forward by the participants in 
the course of its written and oral proceedings. The reasons for the Court 
to arrive at these conclusions are set out in paragraphs 24-67. These, as 
such, raise no major disagreement on my part. However, i believe that 
the issue of jurisdiction and especially the issue of judicial propriety is a 
matter that the Court should examine, proprio motu if necessary, in order 
to ensure that it is not only right as a matter of law but also proper as a 
matter of judicial policy for the Court as a judicial body to exercise 
jurisdiction in the concrete context of the case. This means, at least to my 
mind, that the Court would be required to engage in an in-depth scrutiny 
of all aspects of the particular circumstances of the present case relevant 
to the consideration of the case, if necessary going beyond what has been 
argued by the participants. One of such aspects of the present case is the 
implication of the existence of a bilateral dispute in the subject-matter of 
the request for an advisory opinion. 

\n\n3. The original Statute of the Permanent Court of International Jus- 
tice contained no express provisions relating to advisory jurisdiction. 
Only the Covenant of the League of Nations, in its Article 14, stipulated 
that the Court may also give an advisory opinion upon any dispute or 
question referred to it by the Council or by the Assembly. It was this 
provision that came to form the legal basis for the exercise of advisory 
function by the Permanent Court of International Justice. 

\n\n4. While the purport of this provision according to the intention of the 
founding fathers of the League does not appear to have been entirely 
clear nor unified, one of the points that clearly emerge from the 
legislative history of the Covenant is that the purpose of the advisory function 
of the Permanent Court consisted from the beginning in aiding the 
League in the peaceful settlement of a concrete dispute before the 
Council of the League, in particular in the context of the procedures provided 
for in Articles 12 to 16 of the Covenant . 

\n\n5. When the Rules of Court were drafted in 1922 following the 
establishment of the Permanent Court, four articles (71-74) were consecrated 
to advisory procedure. They affirmed the judicial character of the 
advisory function of the new Court and paved the way for the later fuller 
assimilation of advisory to contentious procedure2. Indeed, the Report of 
the Committee of the Permanent Court of International Justice, 
appointed on 2 September 1927, stated as follows: 
The Statute does not mention advisory opinions, but leaves to 
the Court the entire regulation of its procedure in the matter. The 
Court, in the exercise of this power, deliberately and advisedly 
assimilated its advisory procedure to its contentious procedure; and 
the results have abundantly justified its action. Such prestige as the 
Court to-day enjoys as a judicial tribunal is largely due to the 
amount of its advisory business and the judicial way in which it has 
dealt with such business. In reality, where there are ... contending 
parties, the difference between contentious cases and advisory cases 
is only nominal. The main difference is the way in which the case 
comes before the Court, and even this difference may virtually 
disappear, as it did in the Tunisian case. So the view that advisory 
opinions are not binding is more theoretical than real. (P. C.I.J., 
Series E, No. 4, p. 76.) 

\n\n6. In fact, when the Permanent Court declined to exercise jurisdiction 
to give a requested advisory opinion in the Status of Eastern Careliu case 
(P.C. I. J., Series B, No. 5), the main rationale of this decision lay 
precisely on this point. The specific issue referred to the Court was whether 
Articles 10 and 11 of the Treaty of Peace between Finland and 
Russia of 19201 and the annexed Declaration of the Russian Delegation 
regarding the autonomy of Eastern Carelia, constitute engagements 
of an international character which place Russia under an obligation 
to Finland as to the carrying out of the provisions contained therein 
(ibid, p. 6). 
In other words, it arose in the context of a dispute between Finland and 
Russia involving this issue - 
a matter which Finland asked the League 
of Nations to take up. The Council in its resolution expressed its 
willingness to consider the question with a view to arriving at a satisfactory 
solution if the two parties concerned agree (ibid, p. 23). it was, how- 
ever, due to the circumstances where the Russian Government declined 
the request from the Estonian Government for it to consent to submit 
the question to the Council in conformity with Article 17 of the 
Covenant (ibid., p. 24) and where the Finnish Government again brought 
the matter before the Council, that the Council decided to request the 
advisory opinion in question. 

\n\n7. Against this background, the Permanent Court stated as follows to 
clarify its position: 
There has been some discussion as to whether questions for an 
advisory opinion, if they relate to matters which form the subject of 
a pending dispute between nations, should be put to the Court with- 
out the consent of the parties. It is unnecessary in the present case to 
deal with this topic. (P. C.I. J., Series B, No. 5, p. 27; emphasis 
added.) 

\n\nAfter making this point clear, the Permanent Court continued as follows : 
It follows from the above that the opinion which the Court has 
been requested to give bears on an actual dispute between Finland 
and Russia. As Russia is not Member of the League of Nations, the 
case is one under Article 17 of the Covenant ... the Members of the 
League . . . having accepted the Covenant, are under the obligation 
resulting from the provisions of this part dealing with the pacific
settlement of international disputes. As concerns States not members 
of the League, the situation is quite different; they are not bound by 
the Covenant. The submission, therefore, of a dispute between them 
and a Member of the League for solution according to the method.~ 
provided for in the Covenant, could take place only by virtue of their 
consent. Such consent, however, has never been given by Russia. 
(P. C. I. J., Series B, No. 5, pp. 27-28; emphasis added.). 
It is clear from this passage that the main rationale of the Permanent 
Court in declining the exercise of jurisdiction in the Eastern Carelia case 
was not the existence of a dispute relating to the subject-matter of the 
request between the parties, but rather the fact that one of the parties 
to the dispute did not give its consent to a solution according to the 
methods provided for in the Covenant. 

\n\n8. When the International Court of Justice was reconstituted as the 
institutional successor to the Permanent Court of International Justice, 
and incorporated into the United Nations system as its principal judicial 
organ, no drastic change was introduced in the new Statute of the Inter- 
national Court of Justice relating to its functions or to its constitution in 
this respect. Since then, the advisory function of the Court, as the secondary 
but important function of the Court, has been exercised by the Court in 
line with the course laid down by its predecessor, the Permanent Court of 
International Justice, in the days of the League as described above. 

\n\n9. Given this background, and in light of the case law accumulated in 
the course of years since the establishment of the International Court of 
Justice on the questions of jurisdiction of the Court in advisory 
proceedings and of propriety of its exercise, it is my view that the Court is right 
in its conclusion in the present case that the existence of a dispute on a 
bilateral basis should not be a bar to the Court in giving the advisory 
opinion requested. 

\n\n10. While the existence of a bilateral dispute thus should not exclude 
the Court from exercising jurisdiction in advisory proceedings as a matter 
of judicial propriety, however, it is my view that the existence of a bilat- 
eral dispute should be a factor to be taken into account by the Court in 
determining the extent to which, and the manner in which, the Court 
should exercise jurisdiction in such advisory proceedings. In this respect, 
i am of the view that the Court has drawn too facile an analogy between 
the present case and the past cases of advisory opinion and especially the
case concerning Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence 
of South Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding 
Security Council Resolution 276 (19701, Advisory Opinion. Given the 
intricacies of the present case, i submit that this approach of applying the 
principles drawn from the past precedents automatically to the present 
situation is not quite warranted. 

\n\n11. Especially in the Namibia case, the point in issue that formed the 
basis for the request for an advisory opinion was the legal 
consequences ... of the continued presence of South Africa in Namibia ... 
notwithstanding Security Council resolution 276 (1970). In spite of the 
similarity in language in the formulation of the request, the basis for this 
request was very different from the present one. In the Namibia case, the 
Court was asked to give an opinion on the legal significance of the action 
taken by the United Nations in terminating the South African Mandate 
over South West Africa and its legal impact upon the status of South 
Africa in that territory. If there was a legal controversy or a dispute, it 
was precisely the one between the United Nations and the State con- 
cerned. By contrast, what is in issue in the present situation centres on a 
situation created by the action of Israel vis-i-vis Palestine in relation to 
the Occupied Palestinian Territory. It is undeniable that there is in this 
case an underlying legal controversy or a dispute between the parties 
directly involved in this situation, while at the same time, as the Court 
correctly points out, it concerns a matter between the United Nations 
and Israel since the legal interest of the United Nations is legitimately 
involved. 

\n\n12. This of course is not to sav that the Court should decline for this 
reason the exercise of jurisdiction in the present case. It does mean, how- 
ever, that the question of judicial propriety should be examined taking 
into account this reality, and on the basis of the jurisprudence in more 
pertinent cases. i believe the closest to the present case probably is the 
Western Sahara, Advisory Opinion, case, in the sense the there was in 
that case clearly an underlying legal controversy or a dispute between the 
parties involved. However, even that case does not offer a completely 
analogous precedent, from which the Court can draw its conclusion. In 
the Western Sahara case, the Court stated: 
The object of the General Assembly has not been to bring before 
the Court, by way of a request for advisory opinion, a dispute or 
legal controversy, in order that it may later, on the basis of the 
Courts opinion, exercise its powers and functions for the peaceful 
settlement of that dispute or controversy. The object of the request 
is an entirely different one: to obtain from the Court an opinion 
which the General Assembly deems of assistance to it for the proper 
exercise of its functions concerning the decolonization of the 
territory. (Advisory Opinion, I. C. J. Reports 1975, pp. 26-27, para. 39; 
emphasis added.) 
In the present case, the presumed objective of the General Assembly in 
requesting an advisory opinion would not seem to be the latter so much 
as the former in the two examples given in this passage. 

\n\n13. Thus, acknowledging the fact that in the present case there is this 
undeniable aspect of an underlying legal controversy or a dispute between 
the parties involved, and keeping this aspect clearly in mind, i wish to 
state that the critical test for judicial propriety in exercising jurisdiction 
of the Court, which it undoubtedly has, should lie, not in whether the 
request is related to a concrete legal controversy or dispute in existence, 
but in whether to give a reply would have the effect of circumventing the 
principle that a State is not obliged to allow its disputes to be submitted to 
judicial settlement without its consent ( Western Sahara, Advisory 
Opinion, I. C. J. Reports 1975, p. 25, para. 33; emphasis added). To put it 
differently, the critical criterion for judicial propriety in the final analysis 
should lie in the Court seeing to it that giving a reply in the form of an 
advisory opinion on the subject-matter of the request should not be 
tantamount to adjudicating on the very subject-matter of the underlying 
concrete bilateral dispute that currently undoubtedly exists between Israel 
and Palestine. 

\n\n14. The reasoning that i have offered above leads me to the following 
two conclusions. First, the fact that the present case contains an aspect 
of addressing a bilateral dispute should not prevent the Court from 
exercising its competence. Second, however, this fact should have certain 
important bearing on the whole proceedings that the Court is to conduct 
in the present case, in the sense that the Court in the present advisory 
proceedings should focus its task on offering its objective findings of law 
to the extent necessary and useful to the requesting organ, the General 
Assembly, in carrying out its functions relating to this question, rather 
than adjudicating on the subject-matter of the dispute between the 
parties concerned. 

\n\n15. It should be recalled that, even when deciding to exercise its 
advisory function, this Court has consistently maintained the position that it 
should remain faithful to the requirements of its judicial character. 
Thus in the Western Sahara case the Court declared: 
Article 65, paragraph 1, of the Statute, which establishes the 
power of the Court to give an advisory opinion, is permissive and, 
under it, that power is of a discretionary character. In exercising this 
discretion, the International Court of Justice, like the Permanent 
Court of International Justice, has always been guided by the 
principle that, us a judicial body, it is bound to remain faithful to 
the requirements of its judicial character even in giving advisory 
opinions.  (Advisory Opinion, I. C. J. Reports 1975, p. 21, para. 23 ; 
emphasis added.)

\n\n16. One of such requirements for the Court as a judicial body is the 
maintenance of fairness in its administration of justice in the advisory 
procedure in the midst of divergent positions and interests among the 
interested parties. To put it differently, it must be underlined that the 
Courts discretion in advisory matters is not limited to the question of 
whether to comply with a request. It also embraces questions of advisory 
procedure4 This requirement acquires a special importance in the present 
case, as we accept the undeniable fact as developed above that the present 
case does relate to an underlying concrete legal controversy or a dispute, 
despite my own conclusion that it is proper for the Court to exercise its 
jurisdiction in the present case. 

\n\n17. Article 68 of the Statute of the Court prescribes that in the 
exercise of its advisory functions the Court shall further be guided by the pro- 
visions of the present Statute which apply in contentious cases to the 
extent to which it recognizes them to be applicable. The Rules of Court 
in Part IV (Arts. 102-109) elaborates this provision of the Statute. 
Particularly relevant in this context is Article 102, paragraph 3 of which 
provides that 
When an advisory opinion is requested upon a legal question 
actually pending between two or more States, Article 31 of the 
Statute shall apply, as also the provision of these Rules concerning 
the application of that Article. 

\n\n18. In the Namibia case, South Africa made an application for the 
appointment of a judge ad hoc to sit in the proceedings in accordance 
with this provision. Although the Court in its Order of 29 January 1971 
decided to reject this application (Legal Consequences for States of 
the Continued Presence of South Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) 
notwithstanding Security Council Resolution 2 76 ( 1970), I. C. J. Reports 
1971, p. 12), it was met with well-argued dissenting views on this point 
(ibid, p. 308; p. 324). By contrast, in the Western Sahara case the Court 
took a different position. In response to a request by Morocco for the 
appointment of a judge ad hoc in accordance with Article 89 (Le., present 
Article 102) of the Rules of Court, the Court found that Morocco was 
entitled to choose a judge ad hoc in the proceedings (a similar request by 
Mauritania on the other hand was rejected) (I. C. J. Reports 1975, p. 6). 

\n\n19. The procedure for the appointment of a judge ad hoc is set in 
motion by the application of a State which claims that the request for 
the advisory opinion relates to a legal question actually pending between 
two or more States (Rules of Court, Art. 102). It is my view that in light 
of the precedents noted above, Israel in its special position in the present 
case would have been justified in making an application to choose a judge
ad hoc. For whatever reason, Israel did not choose this course of action. 
If it had done so, the task of the Court in maintaining the essential 
requirement for fairness in the administration of justice would have been 
greatly enhanced. It goes without saying that such a course of action 
would have complicated the situation, due to the fact that the other party 
to this dispute, Palestine, is an entity which is not recognized as a State 
for the purpose of the Statute of the Court. What would happen then if 
one of the parties directly interested is in a position of appointing a judge 
ad hoc, while the other is not. Fairness in the administration of justice 
could be questioned from this angle. While i do not propose to offer my 
own conclusion to this intractable but hypothetical problem, what i wish 
to point out is that this factor is one of the important aspects of the 
present case that could have been considered by the Court in deciding on 
the question of judicial propriety of whether, and if so how far, the Court 
should exercise its jurisdiction in the unique circumstances of this case. 

\n\n20. Be that as it may, it is established that even in contentious 
proceedings the absence of one of the parties in itself does not deprive the 
Court of its jurisdiction to proceed (Statute of the Court, Art. 53), but 
that the Court has to maintain its fairness in the administration of justice 
as a court of justice. Thus, in relation to the question of the law to be 
proved and applied, the Court stated in the cases concerning Fisheries 
Jurisdiction as follows : 
The Court ..., as an international judicial organ, is deemed to 
take judicial notice of international law and is therefore required in 
a case falling under Article 53 of the Statute, as in any other case, to 
consider on its own initiative all rules of international law which 
may be relevant to the settlement of the dispute. It being the duty of 
the Court itself to ascertain and apply the relevant law in the given 
circumstances of the case, the burden of establishing or proving rules 
of international law cannot be imposed upon any of the Parties, for 
the law lies within the judicial knowledge of the Court. (Merits, 
Judgment, I. C. J. Reports 1974, p. 181, para. 18.) 
In relation to the question of the facts to be clarified, the Court in the 
case concerning Military and Paramilitary Activities in and against Nica- 
ragua (Nicaragua V. United States of America) stated that: 
in principle it is not bound to confine its consideration to the 
material formally submitted to it by the parties (cf. Brazilian Loans, 
P. C. I. J., Series A, No. 20121, p. 124; Nuclear Tests, I. C. J. Reports 
1974, pp. 263-264, paras. 31, 32) (Merits, Judgment, I. C. J. Reports 
1986, p. 25, para. 30). 
It went on to state as follows: 
The Court has thus to strike a balance. On the one hand, it is 
valuable for the Court to know the views of both parties in whatever
form those views may have been expressed. Further, as the Court 
noted in 1974, where one party is not appearing it is especially 
incumbent upon the Court to satisfy itself that it is in possession of 
all the available facts (Nuclear Tests, I. C.J. Reports 1974, p. 263, 
para. 31 ; p. 468, para. 32.). On the other hand, the Court has to 
emphasize that the equality of the parties to the dispute must remain 
the basic principle for the Court. (I.C.J. Reports 1986, pp. 25-26, 
para. 31 .) 

\n\n21. This principle governing the basic position of the Court should be 
applicable to advisory proceedings as it is applicable to contentious 
proceedings. Indeed, it may even be arguable that this principle is applicable 
u fortiori to advisory proceedings, in the sense that in advisory 
proceedings as distinct from contentious proceedings it cannot be said, at any 
rate in the legal sense, that the absent party ... forfeits the opportunity 
to counter the factual allegations of its opponent (Military und Paramilitary 
Activities in and against Nicaragua (Nicaragua v. United States of America), 
Merits, Judgment, I. C.J. Reports 1986, p. 25, para. 30). In 
advisory proceedings no State, however interested a party it may be, is 
under the obligation to appear before the Court to present its case. 

\n\n22. On this point of facts and information relating to the present case, 
it is undoubtedly true, as the present Opinion States, that 
the Court has at its disposal the report of the Secretary-General, as 
well as a voluminous dossier submitted by him to the Court, com- 
prising not only detailed information on the route of the wall 
but also on its humanitarian and socio-economic impact on the 
Palestinian population (Advisory Opinion, para. 57). 
Indeed, there is ample material, in particular, about the humanitarian 
and socio-economic impacts of the construction of the wall. Their 
authenticity and reliability are not in doubt. What seems to be wanting, how- 
ever, is the material explaining the Israeli side of the picture, especially in 
the context of why and how the construction of the wall as it is actually 
planned and implemented is necessary and appropriate. 

\n\n23. This, to my mind, would seem to be the case, in spite of the 
Courts assertion that 
Israel's Written Statement, although limited to issues of jurisdiction 
and propriety, contained observations on other matters, including 
Israel's concerns in terms of security, and was accompanied by 
corresponding annexes (Advisory Opinion, para. 57). 
In fact my point would seem to be corroborated by what the present 
Opinion itself acknowledges in relation to the argument of Israel on this 
issue. Israel has argued that the walls sole purpose is to enable it 
effectively to combat terrorist attacks launched from the West Bank, or as the 
report of the Secretary-General puts it, to halt infiltration into Israel 
from the central and northern West Bank (Advisory Opinion, para. 80). 
However, the Court, in paragraph 137 of the Opinion, simply states that 
from the material available to it, it is not convinced that the specific 
course Israel has chosen for the wall was necessary to attain its security 
objectives (emphasis added). It seems clear to me that here the Court is 
in effect admitting the fact that elaborate material on this point from the 
Israeli side is not available, rather than engaging in a rebuttal of the 
arguments of Israel on the basis of the material that might have been made 
available by Israel on this point. Again in paragraph 140 of the Opinion, 
the Court bases itself simply on the material before it to express ifs lack 
of conviction that the construction of the wall along the route chosen 
was the only means to safeguard the interests of Israel against the peril 
which it has invoked as justification for that construction. 

\n\n24. In raising this point, it is not my purpose to dispute the factual 
accuracy of these assertions, or to question the conclusions arrived at on 
the basis of the documents and the material available to the Court. In 
fact it would seem reasonable to conclude on balance that the political, 
social, economic and humanitarian impacts of the construction of the 
wall, as substantiated by ample evidence supplied and documented in the 
course of the present proceedings, is such that the construction of the 
wall would constitute a violation of international obligations under 
various international instruments to which Israel is a Party. Furthermore, 
these impacts are so overwhelming that i am ready to accept that no 
justification based on the military exigencies, even if fortified by 
substantiated facts, could conceivably constitute a valid basis for precluding the 
wrongfulness of the act on the basis of the stringent conditions of 
proportionality. 

\n\n25. However, that is not the point. What is crucial is that the above 
samples of quotations from the present Opinion testify to my point that 
the Court, once deciding to exercise jurisdiction in this case, should be 
extremely careful not only in ensuring the objective fairness in the result, 
but in seeing to it that the Court is seen to maintain fairness throughout 
the proceedings, whatever the final conclusion that we come to may be in 
the end. 

\n\n26. The question put to the Court for its advisory opinion is the 
specific question of the legal consequences arising from the construction of 
the wall being built by Israel (General Assembly resolution AIES-101 
L.16). It concerns only that specific act of Israel. Needless to say, how- 
ever, the Israeli construction of the wall has not come about in a vacuum; 
it is a part, albeit an extremely important part, of the whole picture of the 
situation surrounding the peace in the Middle East with its long history. 

\n\n27. Naturally, this does not alter the fact that the request for an 
advisory opinion is focused on a specific question and that the Court should 
treat this question, and this question only, without expanding the scope
of its enquiry into the bigger question relating to the peace in the Middle 
East, including issues relating to the permanent status of the territories 
involved. Nevertheless, from the viewpoint of getting to an objective 
truth concerning the specific question of the construction of the wall in its 
complete picture and of ensuring fairness in the administration of justice 
in this case which involves the element of a dispute between parties 
directly involved, it seems of cardinal importance that the Court examine 
this specific question assigned to the Court, keeping in balance the overall 
picture which has formed the entire background of the construction of 
the wall.
 
\n\n28. It has always been an undisputed premise of the peace in the 
Middle East that the twin principles of withdrawal of Israel armed 
forces from territories occupied in the 1967 conflict and 
termination of all claims or states of belligerency and respect for 
and acknowledgement of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and 
political independence of every State in the area and their right to 
live in peace within secure and recognized boundaries free from 
threats or acts of force 
have to form the basis of the peace. Security Council resolution 242 (1967) 
has consecrated these principles in so many words. The Roadmap, 
endorsed by Security Council resolution 1515 (2003), is a blueprint for 
proceeding on the basis of these principles. 

\n\n29. If the Court found that the construction of the wall would go 
counter to this principle by impeding and prejudicing the realization of 
the principles, especially in the context of the customary rule of the 
inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by war (Advisory Opinion, 
para. 117), it should state this. At the same time, the Court should 
remind the General Assembly that this was a principle couched in the 
context of the twin set of principles, both of which would have to be 
realized, at any rate in the context of a peace in the Middle East, side by 
side with each other. 

\n\n30. As observed above, Israel has argued that the walls sole purpose is 
to enable it effectively to combat terrorist attacks launched from the 
West Bank. In response to this, the Court has confined itself to stating 
that In the light of the material before it, the Court is not convinced 
that the construction of the wall along the route chosen was the only 
means to safeguard the interests of Israel against the peril which 
it has invoked as justification for that construction. (Advisory 
Opinion, para. 140.) 
\n\nIt is certainly understood that the material available has not included an 
elaboration on this point, and that in the absence of such material the 
Court has found no other way for responding to this situation. It may
also be accepted that this argument of Israel, even if acknowledged as 
true as far as the Israeli motives were concerned, would not be a sufficient 
ground for justifying the construction of the wall as it has actually been 
drawn up and implemented. As the Court has demonstrated with a high 
degree of persuasiveness, the construction of the wall would still 
constitute a breach of Israel's obligations, inter alia, under the Hague 
Regulations Respecting the Laws and Customs of War on Land and the Fourth 
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time 
of War, unless cogent justifications are advanced for precluding the 
wrongfulness of this act. But the important point is that an in-depth 
effort could have been made by the Court, proprio motu, to ascertain the 
validity of this argument on the basis of facts and law, and to present an 
objective picture surrounding the construction of the wall in its entirety, 
on the basis of which to assess the merits of the contention of Israel. 

\n\n31. It is to my mind important in this context that the issue of mutual 
resort to indiscriminate violence against civilian population should be 
looked at. Without going into the question of what is the causal relation- 
ship between the tragic acts of mutual violence resorted to by each of the 
parties and the question of whether the so-called terrorist attacks by 
Palestinian suicide bombers against the Israeli civilian population should 
be blamed as constituting a good enough ground for justifying the 
construction of the wall, i believe it is beyond dispute that this tragic circle 
of indiscriminate violence perpetrated by both sides against innocent 
civilian population of each other is to be condemned and rejected as totally 
unacceptable. While it is true that this is not an issue expressly referred to 
as part of the specific question put to the Court, i believe it should only 
be natural that this factor be underlined as an important segment of the 
Opinion of the Court in dealing with the issue of the construction of the 
wall. This point to my mind is of particular relevance from the viewpoint 
that the Court should approach the subject-matter in a balanced way.




