143. The Court having concluded that, by the construction of the wall in 
the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including in and around East Jerusalem, 
and by adopting its associated régime, Israel has violated various international obligations incumbent upon it (see paragraphs 114-137 above), it must now, in order to reply to the question posed by the General Assembly, examine the consequences of those violations.  

144. In their written and oral observations, many participants in the 
proceedings before the Court contended that Israel's action in illegally 
constructing this wall has legal consequences not only for Israel itself, but also for other States and for the United Nations; in its Written Statement, Israel, for its part, presented no arguments regarding the possible legal consequences of the construction of the wall.

145. As regards the legal consequences for Israel, it was contended that 
Israel has, first, a legal obligation to bring the illegal situation to an end by ceasing forthwith the construction of the wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, and to give appropriate assurances and guarantees of non-repetition.

It was argued that, secondly, Israel is under a legal obligation to make 
reparation for the damage arising from its unlawful conduct. It was submitted that such reparation should first of all take the form of restitution, namely demolition of those portions of the wall constructed in the Occupied Palestinian Territory and annulment of the legal acts associated with its construction and the restoration of property requisitioned or expropriated for that purpose; reparation should also include appropriate compensation for individuals whose homes or agricultural holdings have been destroyed.

It was further contended that Israel is under a continuing duty to comply 
with all of the international obligations violated by it as a result of the 
construction of the wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory and of the 
associated régime. It was also argued that, under the terms of the Fourth 
Geneva Convention, Israel is under an obligation to search for and bring 
before its courts persons alleged to have committed, or to have ordered to be committed, grave breaches of international humanitarian law flowing from 
the planning, construction and use of the wall.

146. As regards the legal consequences for States other than Israel, it was 
contended before the Court that all States are under an obligation not to 
recognize the illegal situation arising from the construction of the wall, not to render aid or assistance in maintaining that situation and to 
co-operate with a view to putting an end to the alleged violations and to ensuring that reparation will be made therefor.  

Certain participants in the proceedings further contended that the States 
parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention are obliged to take measures to 
ensure compliance with the Convention and that, inasmuch as the 
construction and maintenance of the wall in the Occupied Palestinian 
Territory constitutes grave breaches of that Convention, the States parties to that Convention are under an obligation to prosecute or extradite the authors of such breaches. It was further observed that

"the United Nations Security Council should consider flagrant and 
systematic violation of international law norm[s] and principles by Israel, 
particularly...  international humanitarian law, and take all necessary 
measures to put an end [to] these violations",

and that the Security Council and the General Assembly must take due account of the advisory opinion to be given by the Court.

147. Since the Court has concluded that the construction of the wall in the 
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including in and around East Jerusalem, and 
its associated régime, are contrary to various of Israel's international 
obligations, it follows that the responsibility of that State is engaged under international law.

148. The Court will now examine the legal consequences resulting from 
the violations of international law by Israel by distinguishing between, on the one hand, those arising for Israel and, on the other, those arising for other States and, where appropriate, for the United Nations. The Court will begin by examining the legal consequences of those violations for Israel.

149. The Court notes that Israel is first obliged to comply with the 
international obligations it has breached by the construction of the wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory (see paragraphs 114-137 above). 
Consequently, Israel is bound to comply with it s obligation to respect the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination and its obligations under international humanitarian law and international human rights law. 
Furthermore, it must ensure freedom of access to the Holy Places that came 
under its control following the 1967 War (see paragraph 129 above).  

150. The Court observes that Israel also has an obligation to put an end to 
the violation of its international obligations flowing from the construction of the wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory. The obligation of a State responsible for an internationally wrongful act to put an end to that act is well established in general international law, and the Court has on a number of occasions confirmed the existence of that obligation (Mililary and Paramililary Activities in and against Nicaragua (Nicaragua v. United States of America), Merits, Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 1986, p. 149; United States Diplomatic and Consular Staff in Tehran, Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 1980, p. 44, para. 95; Haya de la Torre, Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 1951, p. 82).  

151. Israel accordingly has the obligation to cease forthwith the works of 
construction of the wall being built by it in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including in and around East Jerusalem. Moreover, in view of the Court's finding (see paragraph 143 above) that Israel's violations of  
its international obligations stem from the construction of the wall and from its associated régime, cessation of those violations entails the dismantling forthwith of those parts of that structure situated within the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including in and around East Jerusalem. All legislative and regulatory acts adopted with a view to its construction, and to the establishment of its associated régime, must forthwith be repealed or rendered ineffective, except in so far as such acts, by providing for compensation or other forms of reparation for the Palestinian population, may continue to be relevant for compliance by Israel with the obligations referred to in paragraph 153 below.

152. Moreover, given that the construction of the wall in the Occupied 
Palestinian Territory has, inter alia, entailed the requisition and destruction of homes, businesses and agricultural holdings, the Court finds further that Israel has the obligation to make reparation for the damage caused to all the natural or legal persons concerned. The Court would recall that the essential forms of reparation in customary law were laid down by the Permanent Court of International Justice in the following terms :

"The essential principle contained in the actual notion of an illegal act 
a principle which seems to be established by international practice and in 
particular by the decisions of arbitral tribunals — is that reparation must, as far as possible, wipe out all the consequences of the illegal act and reestablish the situation which would, in all probability, have existed if that act had not been committed. Restitution in kind, or, if this is not 
possible, payment of a sum corresponding to the value which a restitution 
in kind would bear; the award, if need be, of damages for loss sustained 
which would not be covered by restitution in kind or payment in place of 
it such are the principles which should serve to determine the amount of 
compensation due for an act contrary to international law."(Factory at  
Chorzów, Merits, Judgment No. 13, 1928, P.C.I.J. , Series A, No. 17, p. 
47.)

153. Israel is accordingly under an obligation to return the land, orchards, olive groves and other immovable property seized from any natural or legal person for purposes of construction of the wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory. In the event that such  restitution should prove to be materially impossible, Israel has an obligation to compensate the persons in question for the damage suffered. The Court considers that Israel also has an obligation to compensate, in accordance with the applicable rules of international law, all natural or legal persons having suffered any form of material damage as a result of the wall's construction.  

154. The Court will now consider the legal consequences of the 
internationally wrongful acts flowing from Israel's construction of the wall as regards other States. 
  
155. The Court would observe that the obligations violated by Israel 
include certain obligations erga omnes. As the Court indicated in the 
Barcelona Traction case, such obligations are by their very nature "the concern of all States" and, "In view of the importance of the rights involved, all States can be held to have a legal interest in their protection" (Barcelona Traction, Light and Power Company, Limited, Second Phase, Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 1970, p. 32, para. 33). The obligations erga omnes violated by Israel are the obligation to respect the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination, and certain of its obligations under international humanitarian law.

156. As regards the first of these, the Court has already observed 
(paragraph 88 above) that in the East Timor case, it described as 
"irreproachable" the assertion that "the right of peoples to 
self-determination, as it evolved from the Charter and from United Nations 
practice, has an erga omnes character" (I.C.J. Reports 1995, p. 102, para. 29). The Court would also recall that under the terms of General Assembly 
resolution 2625 (XXV), already mentioned above (see paragraph 88),

"Every State has the duty to promote, through joint and separate action, 
realization of the principle of equal rights and self-determination of 
peoples, in accordance with the provisions of the Charter, and to render 
assistance to the United Nations in carrying out the responsibilities 
entrusted to it by the Charter regarding the implementation of the principle..." 

157. With regard to international humanitarian law, the Court recalls that 
in its Advisory Opinion on the Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear 
Weapons it stated that "a great many rules of humanitarian law applicable in armed conflict are so fundamental to the respect of the human person and 
'elementary considerations of humanity'..., that they are "to be observed by all States whether or not they have ratified the conventions that contain them, because they constitute intransgressible principles of international customary law"" (I.C.J. Reports 1996 (I), p. 257, para. 79). In the Court's view, these rules incorporate obligations which are 
essentially of an erga omnes character.

158. The Court would also emphasize that Article I of the Fourth Geneva 
Convention, a provision common to the four Geneva Conventions, provides 
that "The High Contracting Parties undertake to respect and to ensure respect for the present Convention in all circumstances." It follows from that provision that every State party to that Convention, whether or  
not it is a party to a specific conflict, is under an obligation to ensure that the requirements of the instruments in question are complied with.  

159. Given the character and the importance of the rights and obligations 
involved, the Court is of the view that all States are under an obligation not to recognize the illegal situation resulting from the construction of the wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including in and around East Jerusalem. They are also under an obligation not to render aid or assistance in maintaining the situation created by such construction. It is also for all States, while respecting the United Nations Charter and 
international law, to see to it that any impediment, resulting from the construction of the wall, to the exercise by the Palestinian people of its right to self-determination is brought to an end. In addition, all the States parties to the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War of 12 August 1949 are under an obligation, while respecting the United Nations Charter and international law, 
to ensure compliance by Israel with international humanitarian law as 
embodied in that Convention.

160. Finally, the Court is of the view that the United Nations, and 
especially the General Assembly and the Security Council, should consider 
what further action is required to bring to an end the illegal situation resulting from the construction of the wall and the associated régime, taking due account of the present Advisory Opinion.

