\n\nSEPARATE OPINION OF JUDGE KOROMA 
\n\n1. While concurring with the Court's findings that the construction of 
the wall being built by Israel, the occupying Power, in the Occupied 
Palestinian Territory, including in and around East Jerusalem, and its 
associated régime are contrary to international law, I nevertheless con- 
sider it necessary to stress the following points.
\n\n2. First and foremost. the construction of the wall has involved the 
annexation of parts of the occupied territory by Israel, the occupying 
Power, contrary to the fundamental international law principle of the 
non-acquisition of territory by force. The Court has confirmed the 
Palestinian territories as occupied territory and Israel is therefore not 
entitled to embark there on activities of a sovereign nature which will 
change their status as occupied territory. The essence of occupation is 
that it is only of a temporary nature and should serve the interests of the 
population and the military needs of the occupying Power. Accordingly, 
anything which changes its character, such as the construction of the 
wall, will be illegal. 
\n\n3. Understandable though it is that there may be a diversity of legal 
views and perspectives on the question submitted to the Court, namely, 
the rights and obligations of an occupying Power in an occupied territory 
and the remedies available under international law for breaches of those 
obligations - a question which, in my view, is eminently legal and falls 
within the advisory jurisdiction of the Court - 
the objection is not sustainable that the Court lacks competence to rule on such a question, as 
determined under the United Nations Charter (Art. 96 - functional 
CO-operation on legal questions between the Court and the General 
Assembly), the Statute of the Court (Art. 65 discretionary power; and 
Art. 68 - assimilation with contentious procedures), the Rules of Court 
(Art. 102, para. 2 - assimilation with contentious proceedings), and the 
settled jurisprudence of the Court. Also not sustainable is the objection 
based on judicial propriety, which the Court duly considered in terms of 
its competence and of fairness in the administration of justice. In this 
regard, the question put to the Court is not about the Israeli-Palestinian 
conflict as such, nor its resolution, but rather the legal consequences of 
the construction of the wall in the occupied territory. In other words, is it 
permissible under existing law for an occupying Power, unilaterally, to
bring about changes in the character of an occupied territory? An eminently 
legal question, which, in my view, is susceptible of a legal response 
and which does not by necessity have to assume the nature of an adjudication 
of a bilateral dispute; it is a request for elucidation of the applicable 
law. It is to that question that the Court has responded. It was 
therefore appropriate for the Court to exercise its advisory jurisdiction in 
this matter. The jurisdictional basis of the Court's Advisory Opinion is 
thus firmly anchored in its jurisprudence.
\n\n4. The function of the Court in such proceedings is to ascertain and 
apply the law to the issue at hand. To reach its findings, the Court has 
applied the relevant rules of the international law of occupation as it pertains
 to the Palestinian territories. Applying these rules, the Court has 
found that the territories were occupied territory and thus not open to 
annexation; that any such annexation would be tantamount to a violation 
of international law and contrary to international peace. Under the 
régime of occupation, the division or partition of an occupied territory by 
the occupying Power is illegal. Moreover, in terms of contemporary inter- 
national law, every State is under an obligation to refrain from any 
action aimed at the partial or total disruption of the national unity and 
territorial integrity of any other State or country. 
\n\n5. The Court has also held that the right of self-determination as an 
established and recognized right under international law applies to the 
territory and to the Palestinian people. Accordingly, the exercise of such 
right entitles the Palestinian people to a State of their own as originally 
envisaged in resolution 181 (II) and subsequently confirmed. The Court 
has found that the construction of the wall in the Palestinian territory 
will prevent the realization of such a right and is therefore a violation 
of it. 
\n\n6. With respect to humanitarian and human rights law, the Court has 
rightly adjudged that both these régimes are applicable to the occupied 
territories; that Israel as the occupying Power is under an obligation to 
respect the rights of the Palestinian population of the occupied territories. 
Accordingly, the Court has held that the construction of the wall in 
the occupied territories violates the régime of humanitarian and human 
rights law. To put an end to such violations, the Court has rightly called 
for the immediate cessation of the construction of the wall and the payment 
of reparation for damages caused by the construction. 
\n\n7. Equally important is the finding that the international community 
as a whole bears an obligation towards the Palestinian people as a former 
mandated territory, on whose behalf the international community holds 
a "sacred trust", not to recognize any unilateral change in the status of 
the territory brought about by the construction of the wall.
\n\n8. The Court's findings are based on the authoritative rules of international
 law and are of an erga omnes character. The Court's response 
provides an authoritative answer to the question submitted to it. Given 
the fact that al1 States are bound by those rules and have an interest in 
their observance, al1 States are subject to these findings.

\n\n9. Just as important is the cal1 upon the parties to the conflict to 
respect humanitarian law in the ongoing hostilities. While it is understandable
that a prolonged occupation would engender resistance, it is 
nonetheless incumbent on al1 parties to the conflict to respect international
humanitarian law at al1 times. 
\n\n10. In making these findings, the Court has performed its role as the 
supreme arbiter of international legality and safeguard against illegal 
acts. It is now up to the General Assembly in discharging its responsibilities
under the Charter to treat this Advisory Opinion with the respect and 
seriousness it deserves, not with a view to making recriminations but to 
utilizing these findings in such a way as to bring about a just and peaceful 
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, a conflict which has not only 
lasted for far too long but has caused enormous suffering to those 
directly involved and poisoned international relations in general.  