\n\nSEPARATE OPINION OF JUDGE AL-KHASAWNEH
1.I concur with the Court's findings and agree in general with its
reasoning. Certain salient points in the Advisory Opinion merit some
elucidation and it is specifically with regard to those points that I append
this opinion. 


\n\n2. Few propositions in international law can be said to command an
almost universal acceptance and to rest on a long, constant and solid
opinio juris as the proposition that Israel's presence in the Palestinian
territory of the West Bank including East Jerusalem and Gaza is one of 
military occupation governed by the applicable international legal régime
of military occupation.

\n\n3. In support of this, one may cite the very large number of resolutions
adopted by the Security Council and the General Assembly often unanimously 
or by overwhelming majorities, including binding decisions of
the Council and other resolutions which, while not binding, nevertheless
produce legal effects and indicate a constant record of the international
community's opinio juris. In al1 of these resolutions the territory in
question was unfalteringly characterized as occupied territory; Israel's
presence in it as that of a military occupant and Israel's compliance
or non-compliance with its obligations towards the territory and its
inhabitants measured against the objective yardstick of the protective
norms of humanitarian law.

\n\n4. Similarly the High Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention 
and the International Cornmittee of the Red Cross have retained
their consensus that the convention, i.e. the Fourth Geneva Convention
of 12 August 1949, does apply de jure to the occupied territories '.

\n\n5. This has also been the position of States individually or in groups
including States friendly to Israel. Indeed a review of the record would
reveal that, as noted by France in its Written Statement: 

\n\nIsrael initially recognized the applicability of the Fourth Convention: 
according to Article 35 of Order No. 1, issued by the occupying
authorities on 7 June 1967 [translation by the Registry], '[tlhe 
Military Court ... must apply the provisions of the Geneva Convention
dated 12 August 1949, Relative to the Protection of Civilians in
Time of War, with respect to judicial procedures. In case of conflict
between this Order and said Convention, the Convention shall
prevail ...' (P. 7.) 

\n\n6. More recently Israel's Supreme Court has confirmed the applicability 
of the Fourth Geneva Convention to those territories.

\n\n7. Whilst that consistent record of the international community's
opinio juris cannot just be swept aside and ignored, the Court did not 
simply reiterate that opinio juris, instead, while taking cognizance of it,
the Court arrived at similar conclusions regarding the de jure applicability 
of the Fourth Geneva Convention mainly on the basis of a textual
interpretation of the Convention itself (paras. 86-101). Paragraph 101 reads: 

\n\nIn view of the foregoing, the Court considers that the Fourth
Geneva Convention is applicable in any occupied territory in the event
of an armed conflict arising between two or more High Contracting
Parties. Israel and Jordan were parties to that Convention when the
1967 armed conflict broke out. The Court accordingly finds that that
Convention is applicable in the Palestinian territories which before
the conflict lay to the east of the Green Line and which, during that
conflict, were occupied by Israel, there being no need for any enquiry
into the precise prior status of those territories.  


\n\n8. The Court followed a wise course in steering away from embarking
on an enquiry into the precise prior status of those territories not only
because such an enquiry is unnecessary for the purpose of establishing
their present status as occupied territories and affirming the de jure 
applicability of the Fourth Geneva Convention to them, but also because the
prior status of the territories would make no difference whatsoever to
their present status as occupied territories except in the event that they
were terra nu1lius when they were occupied by Israel, which no one would
seriously argue given that that discredited concept is of no contemporary
application, besides being incompatible with the territories' status as a
former mandatory territory regarding which, as the Court had occasion
to pronounce two principles were considered to be of paramount importance: the
principle of non-annexation and the principle that the well-being
and development of... peoples [not yet able to govern themselves]
form[ed] 'a sacred trust of civilization' (International Status of
South West Africa, Advisory Opinion, I.C.J. Reports 1950, p. 131). 


\n\n9. Whatever the merits and demerits of the Jordanian title in the West
Bank might have been, and Jordan would in al1 probability argue that its
title there was perfectly valid and internationally recognized and point
out that it had severed its legal ties to those territories in favour of
Palestinian self-determination, the fact remains that what prevents this
right of self-determination from being fulfilled is Israel's prolonged
military occupation with its policy of creating faits accomplis on the
ground. In this regard it should be recalled that the principle of 
non-annexation is not extinguished with the end of the mandate but subsists
until it is realized. 

\n\n10. There is no doubt that the Green Line was initially no more than
an armistice line in an agreement that expressly stipulated that its 
provisions would not be interpreted as prejudicing, in any sense, an ultimate
political settlement between the Parties and that the Armistice 
Demarcation Lines defined in articles V and VI of [the] Agreement [were] agreed
upon by the Parties without prejudice to future territorial settlements or
boundary lines or to claims of either Party relating thereto (Advisory
Opinion, para. 72). 

\n\n11. It is not without irony that prominent Israeli jurists were arguing
before the 1967 war that the General Armistice agreements were sui
generis, were in fact more than mere armistice agreements, could not be
changed except with the acceptance of the Security Council. Whatever
the true significance of that line today, two facts are indisputable:

\n\n(1) The Green line, to quote Sir Arthur Watts, is the starting line from
which is measured the extent of Israel's occupation of non-Israeli
territory (CR 2004/3, p. 64, para. 35). There is no implication that
the Green Line is to be a permanent frontier.
\n\n(2) Attempts at denigrating the significance of the Green Line would in
the nature of things work both ways. Israel cannot shed doubts upon
the title of others without expecting its own title and the territorial
expanse of that title beyond the partition resolution not to be called
into question. Ultimately it is through stabilizing its legal 
relationship with the Palestinians and not through constructing walls that its
security would be assured.

\n\n12. The Court has included a reference to the tragic situation in the
Holy Land. A situation that can be brought to an end 
only through implementation in good faith of all relevant Security
Council resolutions, in particular resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973). The 'Roadmap' approved by Security Council resolution 1515
(2003) represents the most recent of efforts to initiate negotiations to
this end. (Advisory Opinion, para. 162.) 

\n\n13. Whilst there is nothing wrong in calling on protagonists to negotiate 
in good faith with the aim of implementing Security Council 
resolutions and while recalling that negotiations have produced peace 
agreements that represent defensible schemes and have withstood the test of
time, no one should be oblivious that negotiations are a means to an end
and cannot in themselves replace that end. The discharge of international

\n\nobligations including erga omnes obligations cannot be made conditional
upon negotiations. Additionally, it is doubtful, with regard to the 
Roadmap, when consideration is had to the conditions of acceptance of that
effort, whether the meeting of minds necessary to produce mutual and
reciprocal obligations exists. Be that as it may, it is of the utmost 
importance if these negotiations are not to produce non-principled solutions,
that they be grounded in law and that the requirement of good faith be
translated into concrete steps by abstaining from creating faits accomplis
on the ground such as the building of the wall which cannot but prejudice
the outcome of those negotiations. 

