\n\nSEPARATE OPINION OF JUDGE ELARABY 
\n\nI would like to express, at the outset, my complete and unqualified support 
for the findings and conclusions of the Court. I consider it necessary, 
however, to exercise my entitlement under Article 57 of the Statute, to 
append this separate opinion to elaborate on some of the historical and 
legal aspects contained in the Advisory Opinion. 
\n\nI feel obliged, with considerable reluctance, to start by referring to 
paragraph 8 of the Advisory Opinion. In my view, as Judge Lachs wrote 
in his separate opinion in Military und Paramilitary Activities in and 
against Nicaragua (Nicaragua v. United States of America) , Judgment, 
\n\nA judge -- as needs no emphasis - is bound to be impartial, objective, 
detached, disinterested and unbiased. (I.C.J. Reports 1986, p. 158.) 
Throughout the consideration of this Advisory Opinion, I exerted every 
effort to be guided by this wise maxim which has a wider scope than the 
solemn declaration every judge makes in conformity with Article 20 of 
the Statute of the International Court of Justice. 

\n\nIn this separate opinion, I will address three interrelated points: 

\n\n(i) the nature and scope of the United Nations responsibility; 
\n\n(ii) the international legal status of the Occupied Palestinian Territory; 
\n\n(iii) the law of belligerent occupation. 

\n\n1. The first point to be emphasized is the need to spell out the nature 
and the wide-ranging scope of the United Nations historical and legal 
responsibility towards Palestine. Indeed, the Court has referred to this 
special responsibility when it held that: 

\n\nThe responsibility of the United Nations in this matter also has 
its origin in the Mandate and the Partition Resolution concerning 
Palestine ... this responsibility has been manifested by the adoption 
of many Security Council and General Assembly resolutions, and by 
the creation of several subsidiary bodies specifically established to 
assist in the realization of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian 
people. (Advisory Opinion, para. 49.) 

\n\nWhat I consider relevant to emphasize is that this special responsibility 
was discharged for five decades without proper regard for the rule of law. 
The question of Palestine has dominated the work of the United Nations 
since its inception, yet no organ has ever requested the International 
Court of Justice to clarify the complex legal aspects of the matters under 
its purview. Decisions with far-reaching consequences were taken on the 
basis of political expediency, without due regard for the legal requirements. 
Even when decisions were adopted, the will to follow through to 
implementation soon evaporated. Competent United Nations organs, 
including the General Assembly and the Security Council, have adopted 
streams of resolutions that remain wholly or partially unfulfilled. The 
United Nations special responsibility has its origin in General Assembly 
resolution 118 (II) of 29 November 1947 (hereafter, the Partition 
Resolution). 

\n\nProposals to seek advisory opinions prior to the adoption of the 
Partition Resolution were considered on many occasions in the competent 
subsidiary bodies but no request was ever adopted. This fact by itself 
confers considerable importance on the request for an advisory opinion 
embodied in General Assembly resolution ES-10/14 (A/ES-lO/L.l6), 
adopted on 8 December 2003, at the 23rd meeting of the resumed Tenth 
Emergency Special Session. The request is indeed a landmark in the 
United Nations consideration of the question of Palestine. The historical 
record of some previous attempts to seek the views of the International 
Court of Justice deserves to be recalled, albeit briefly. 

\n\nThe report of the Sub-Committee 2 in 1947 to the Ad Hoc Committee 
on the Palestinian Question recognized the necessity to clarify the legal 
issues. In paragraph 38, it was stated: 

\n\nThe Sub-Committee examined in detail the legal issues raised by 
the delegations of Syria and Egypt, and its considered views are 
recorded in this report. There is, however, no doubt that it would be 
advantageous and more satisfactory from al1 points of view if an 
advisory opinion on these difficult and complex legal and constitutional 
issues were obtained from the highest international judicial 
tribunal. (Document A/AC. 14/32 and Add. 1, 11 November 1947, 
para. 38.)


\n\nThe difficult and complex legal and constitutional issues revolved 
around : 

\n\nWhether the General Assembly is competent to recommend either 
of the solutions proposed by the majority and by the minority 
respectively of the Special Committee, and whether it lies within the 
power of any Member or group of Members of the United Nations 
to implement any of the proposed solutions without the consent 
of the people of Palestine (document A/AC.14/32 and Add.1, 
11 November 1947, para. 37).

\n\nSeveral such proposals were considered. None was adopted. The Sub- 
Committee in its report, some two weeks before the vote on the Partition 
Resolution, recognized that : 

\n\nA refusal to submit this question for the opinion of the 
International Court of Justice would amount to a confession that the 
General Assembly is determined to make recommendations in a certain 
direction, not because those recommendations are in accord with the 
principles of international justice and fairness, but because the 
majority of the representatives desire to settle the problem in a certain 
manner, irrespective of what the merits of the question or the legal 
obligations of the parties might be. Such an attitude will not serve to 
enhance the prestige of the United Nations.... (Ibid., para. 40.)

\n\nThe clear and well-reasoned arguments calling for clarification and 
elucidation of the legal issues fell on deaf ears. The rush to vote proceeded 
without clarifying the legal aspects. In this context, it is relevant to recall 
that the Partition Resolution fully endorsed referral of any dispute 
relating to the application or interpretation of its provisions to the 
International Court of Justice. The referral shall be ... at the request of either 
party. Needless to say, this avenue was also never followed.

\n\nThus, the request by the General Assembly for an advisory opinion, as 
contained in resolution 10/14, represents the first time ever that the 
International Court of Justice has been consulted by a United Nations organ 
with respect to any aspect regarding Palestine. The Advisory Opinion has 
great historical significance as a landmark which will definitely add to its 
legal value.

\n\n2.1. The international legal status of the Palestinian Territory 
(paras. 70-71 of the Advisory Opinion), in my view, merits more 
comprehensive treatment. An historical survey is relevant to the question posed 
by the General Assembly, for it serves as the background to understanding 
the legal status of the Palestinian Territory on the one hand and underlines 
the special and continuing responsibility of the General Assembly on 
the other. This may appear as academic, without relevance to the present 
events. The present is however determined by the accumulation of past 
events and no reasonable and fair concern for the future can possibly 
disregard a firm grasp of past events. In particular, when on more than one 
occasion the rule of law was consistently side-stepped. 
The point of departure, or one can say in legal jargon, the critical date, 
is the League of Nations Mandate which was entrusted to Great Britain. 
As stated in the Preamble of the Mandate for Palestine, the United 
Kingdom undertook to exercise it on behalf of the League of Nations. The 
Mandate must be considered in the light of the Covenant of the League 
of Nations. One of the primary responsibilities of the Mandatory Power 
was to assist the peoples of the territory to achieve full self-government 
and independence at the earliest possible date. Article 22, paragraph 1, of 
the Covenant stipulated that the well-being and development of such 
peoples form a sacred trust of civilisation. The only limitation imposed 
by the Leagues Covenant upon the sovereignty and full independence 
of the people of Palestine was the temporary tutelage entrusted to the 
Mandatory Power. Palestine fell within the scope of Class A Mandates 
under Article 22, paragraph 4, of the Covenant, which provided that :

\n\nCertain communities formerly belonging to the Turkish Empire 
have reached a stage of development where their existence as 
independent nations can be provisionally recognized subject to the 
rendering of administrative advice and assistance by a Mandatory 
until such time as they are able to stand alone. 

\n\nThe conventional wisdom and the general expectation were such that 
when the stage of rendering administrative advice and assistance had 
been concluded and the Mandate had come to an end, Palestine would 
be independent as of that date, since its provisional independence as a 
nation was already legally acknowledged by the Covenant. Moreover, the 
Covenant clearly differentiated between the communities which formerly 
belonged to the Turkish Empire, and other territories. Regarding the 
latter, the Mandatory Power was held responsible for the complete 
administration of the territory and was not confined to administrative 
advice and assistance. These distinct arrangements can be interpreted as 
further recognition by the Covenant of the special status of the former 
Turkish territories which included Palestine. 
In point of fact, the report submitted by Sub-Committee 2 to the Ad 
Hoc Committee on the Palestinian Question in 1947 shed more light on 
the status of Palestine. The report gave the conclusion that the 
people of Palestine are ripe for self-government and that it has 
been agreed on all hands that they should be made independent at 
the earliest possible date. It also follows, from what has been said 
above, that the General Assembly is not competent to recommend, 
still less to enforce, any solution other than the recognition of the 
independence of Palestine. (A/AC. 14/32, and Add. 1, 11 November 
1947, para. 18.)

\n\nThe Sub-Committee further submitted the following views: 

\n\nIt will be recalled that the object of the establishment of Class A 
Mandates, such as that for Palestine, under Article 22 of the 
Covenant, was to provide for a temporary tutelage under the Mandatory 
Power, and one of the primary responsibilities of the Mandatory was 
to assist the peoples of the mandated territories to achieve full 
self-government and independence at the earliest opportunity. It is 
generally agreed that that stage has now been reached in Palestine, 
and not only the United Nations Special Committee on Palestine but 
the Mandatory Power itself agree that the Mandate should be 
terminated and the independence of Palestine recognized. (Ibid., 
para. 15.)

\n\n2.2. The Court has considered the legal nature of mandated territories 
in both 1950 (International Status of South West Africa, Advisory 
Opinion) and 1971 (Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence 
of South Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding 
Security Council Resolution 276 (1970), Advisory Opinion), and laid 
down both the conceptual philosophy and the legal parameters for 
defining the legal status of former mandated territories. The dicta of the 
Court emphasized the special responsibility of the international community. 
It is to be noted that, in the setting up of the mandates system, 
the Court held that two principles were considered to be of paramount importance: the 
principle of non-annexation and the principle that the well-being and 
development of such peoples form a sacred trust of civilization 
(I.C.J. Reports 1950, p. 13 1 ; emphasis added). 

\n\nThe two fundamental principles enunciated by the Court in 1950 apply to 
all former mandated territories which have not gained independence. 
They remain valid today for the Occupied Palestinian Territory. The 
territory cannot be subject to annexation by force and the future of 
the Palestinian people, as a sacred trust of civilization, is the direct 
responsibility and concern of the United Nations.
 
\n\n2.3. It should be borne in mind that General Assembly resolution 181 (II) 
of 29 November 1947, which partitioned the territory of mandated 
Palestine, called for, inter alia, the following steps to be undertaken:

\n\n(i) the termination of the Mandate not later than 1 August 1948; 
\n\n(ii) the establishment of two independent States, one Arab and one 
Jewish; 
\n\n(iii) the period between the adoption of the Partition Resolution and 
the establishment of the independence of the Arab and Jewish 
States shall be a transitional period. 

\n\nOn 14 May 1948, the independence of the Jewish State was declared. 
The Israeli declaration was by virtue of Israels natural and historic 
right and based on the strength of the resolution of the United Nations 
General Assembly . The independence of the Palestinian Arab State has 
not yet materialized. 
\n\nThat there shall be a transitional period pending the establishment 
of the two States is a determination by the General Assembly within its 
sphere of competence and should be binding on all Member States as 
having legal force and legal consequences This conclusion finds support 
in the jurisprudence of the Court. 
The Court has held in the Namibia case that when the General 
Assembly declared the Mandate to be terminated,

\n\nSouth Africa has no other right to administer the Territory. This 
is not a finding on facts, but the formulation of a legal situation. For 
it would not be correct to assume that. because the General Assembly 
is in principle vested with recommendatory powers, it is debarred 
from adopting, in specific cases within the framework of its 
competence, resolutions which make determinations or have operative 
design. (Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence 
of South Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding 
Security Council Resolution 276 (1970), Advisory Opinion, I.C.J. 
Reports 1971. p. 50, para. 105.) 

\n\nThe Court, moreover, has previously held, in the Certain Expenses 
case, that the decisions of the General Assembly on important questions 
under Article 18, have dispositive force and effect (Certain 
Expenses of the United Nations (Article 17, paragraph 2, of the Charter), 
Advisory Opinion, I.C.J. Reports 1962, p. 163).

\n\nThe legal force and effect of a General Assembly resolution adopted by 
the General Assembly within the framework of its competence is therefore 
well established in the Courts jurisprudence. On that basis, it is 
submitted that two conclusions appear imperative: 

\n\n(a) the United Nations is under an obligation to pursue the establishment 
of an independent Palestine, a fact which necessitates that the 
General Assemblys special legal responsibility not lapse until the 
achievement of this objective; 
\n\n(b) the transitional period referred to in the Partition Resolution serves 
as a legal nexus with the Mandate. The notion of a transitional 
period carrying the responsibilities emanating from the Mandate to 
the present is a political reality, not a legal fiction, and finds support 
in the dicta of the Court, in particular, that former mandated territories 
are the sacred trust of civilization and cannot be annexed. 
The stream of General Assembly and Security Council resolutions 
on various aspects of the question of Palestine provides cogent 
proof that this notion of a transitional period is generally, albeit 
implicitly, accepted. 

\n\n2.4. The legal status of the Occupied Palestinian Territories cannot be 
fully appreciated without an examination of Israels contractual undertakings 
to respect the territorial integrity of the territory, and to withdraw 
from the occupied territories. The withdrawal and the territorial 
integrity injunctions are based on Security Council resolution 242 (1967) 
which is universally considered as the basis for a just, viable and 
comprehensive settlement. Resolution 242 (1967) is a multidimensional 
resolution which addresses various aspects of the Arab-Israeli dispute. I will 
focus only on the territorial dimension of resolution 242 (1967): 
the resolution contained two basic principles which defined the scope and the 
status of the territories occupied in 1967 and confirmed that occupied 
territories have to be de-occupied: resolution 242 (1967) emphasized the 
inadmissibility of acquisition of territory by war, thus prohibiting the 
annexation of the territories occupied in the 1967 conquest. It called for 
the withdrawal of Israeli armed forces from the territories occupied in the 
conflict. On 22 October 1973, the Security Council adopted resolution 338 (1973) 
which reiterated the necessity to implement resolution 242 
(1967) in al1 of its parts (S/RES/338 of 22 October 1973, para. 2). 
Following resolution 242 (1967), several undertakings to end the Israeli 
military occupation, while reserving the territorial integrity of the West 
Bank and Gaza, were made by Israel: 

\n\n(a) The Camp David Accords of 17 September 1978, in which Israel
agreed that the basis for a peaceful settlement of the conflict with its
neighbours is United Nations Security Council resolution 242 (1967)
in all its parts.
\n\n(b) The Oslo Accord, signed in Washington, D.C. on 13 September
1993, which was a bilateral agreement between Israel and Palestine.
Article IV of the Oslo Accord provides that the two sides view the
West Bank and the Gaza Strip as a single territorial unit whose
integrity will be preserved during the interim period.
\n\n(c) The Israeli-Palestinian Interim Agreement on the West Bank and
the Gaza Strip, signed in Washington, D.C. on 28 September 1995,
reiterated the commitment to respect the integrity and status of the
Territory during the interim period. In addition, Article XXXI (7)
provided that neither side shall initiate or take any step that will
change the status of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip pending the
outcome of the permanent status negotiations.

\n\nThus Israel undertook to carry out the following obligations:

\n\n(i) to withdraw in conformity with resolution 242 (1967);
\n\n(ii) to respect the territorial integrity of the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip; and
\n\n(iii) to refrain from taking any step that would change the status of the
West Bank and Gaza.

\n\nThese undertakings were contractual and are legally binding on Israel.

\n\n2.5. Yet, notwithstanding the general prohibition against annexing
occupied territories, the dicta of the Court on the legal nature of former
mandatory territories, and in clear contravention of binding bilateral
undertakings, on 14 April 2004, the Prime Minister of Israel addressed a
letter to the President of the United States. Attached to the letter is a
Disengagement Plan which one has to interpret as authoritatively reflecting 
Israels intention to annex Palestinian territories. The Disengagement
Plan provides that it is clear that in the West Bank, there are areas which will be part
of the State of Israel, including cities, towns and villages, security
areas and installations, and other places of special interest to Israel.


\n\nThe clear undertakings to withdraw and to respect the integrity and
status of the West Bank and Gaza legally debar Israel from infringing
upon or altering the international legal status of the Palestinian territory.
The construction of the wall, with its chosen route and associated régime,
has to be read in the light of the Disengagement Plan. It is safe to assume
that the construction was conceived with a view to annexing Palestinian
territories, cities, towns and villages in the West Bank which will be
part of the State of Israel. The letter of the Prime Minister of Israel was
dated 14 April 2004, over two months before the delivery of the Advisory 
Opinion.The Court reached the correct conclusion regarding the characterization 
of the wall when it held that: 

\n\nThe construction of the wall and its associated régime create a fait 
accompli on the ground that could well become permanent, in 
which case, and notwithstanding the formal characterization of the 
wall by Israel, it would be tantamount to de facto annexation 
(Advisory Opinion, para. 121). 

\n\nIt is submitted that this finding should have been reflected in the dispositif 
with an affirmation that the Occupied Palestinian Territory cannot be 
annexed. It would also have been appropriate, in my view, to refer to the 
implications of the letter of the Prime Minister of Israel and its attachments 
and to underline that what it purports to declare is a breach of 
Israels obligations and contrary to international law. 

\n\nThe Court was requested by the General Assembly to urgently render 
an advisory opinion on the legal consequences arising from the 
construction of the wall being built by Israel, the occupying Power, in the 
Occupied Palestinian Territory (A/RES/ES- 10/14-A/ES-1O/L. 16). The 
focus of the request evolves around the law of belligerent occupation. As 
already stated, I do concur with the reasoning and conclusions in the 
Advisory Opinion. I feel constrained, however, to emphasize and elaborate 
on some points: 

\n\n(a) the prolonged occupation; 
\n\n(b) the scope and limitations of the principle of military necessity; 
\n\n(c) the grave breaches of international humanitarian law; and 
\n\n(d) the right to self-determination. 

\n\n3.1. The prohibition of the use of force, as enshrined in Article 2, 
paragraph 4, of the Charter, is no doubt the most important principle that 
emerged in the twentieth century. It is universally recognized as a jus 
cogens principle, a peremptory norm from which no derogation is permitted. 
The Court recalls in paragraph 87, the Declaration on Principles 
of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation 
among States (resolution 2625 (XXV)), which provides an agreed 
interpretation of Article 2 (4). The Declaration emphasized that No 
territorial acquisition resulting from the threat or use of force shall be 
recognized as legal (Advisory Opinion, para. 87). The general principle that 
an illegal act cannot produce legal rights - ex injuria jus non oritur - is 
well recognized in international law. 

\n\nThe Israeli occupation has lasted for almost four decades. Occupation, 
regardless of its duration, gives rise to a myriad of human, legal and 
political problems. In dealing with prolonged belligerent occupation, 
international law seeks to perform a holding operation pending the 
termination of the conflict. No one underestimates the inherent difficulties 
that arise during situations of prolonged occupation. A prolonged occupation 
strains and stretches the applicable rules, however, the law of 
belligerent occupation must be fully respected regardless of the duration 
of the occupation. 
\n\nProfessor Christopher Greenwood provided a correct legal analysis 
which I share. He wrote: 

\n\nNevertheless, there is no indication that international law permit
an occupying power to disregard provisions of the Regulations 
or the Convention merely because it has been in occupation for a 
long period, not least because there is no body of law which might 
plausibly take their place and no indication that the international 
community is willing to trust the occupant with carte blanche.

\n\nBoth Israelis and Palestinians are subjected to untold sufferings. Both 
Israelis and Palestinians have a right to live in peace and security. 
Security Council resolution 242 (1967) affirmed the right of every State in the 
area ... to live in peace within secure and recognized boundaries free 
from threats or acts of force (S/RES/242 (1967), para. 1 (ii)). These are 
solemn reciprocal rights which give rise to solemn legal obligations. The 
right to ensure and enjoy security applies to the Palestinians as well as to 
the Israelis. Security cannot be attained by one party at the expense of 
the other. By the same token of corresponding rights and obligations, the 
two sides have a reciprocal obligation to scrupulously respect and comply 
with the rules of international humanitarian law by respecting the rights, 
dignity and property of the civilians. Both sides are under a legal obligation 
to measure their actions by the identical yardstick of international 
humanitarian law which provides protection for the civilian population. 

\n\nThe Court has very clearly held, in the Legality of the Threat or Use of
Nuclear Weapon case, that 

\n\nThe cardinal principles contained in the texts constituting the 
fabric of humanitarian law are the following. The first is aimed at 
the protection of the civilian population and civilian objects and 
establishes the distinction between combatants and non-combatants; 
States must never make civilians the object of attack and must consequently 
never use weapons that are incapable of distinguishing 
between civilian and military targets. According to the second principle, 
it is prohibited to cause unnecessary suffering to combatants: 
it is accordingly prohibited to use weapons causing them such harm 
or uselessly aggravating their suffering. In application of that second 
principle, States do not have unlimited freedom of choice of means 
in the weapons they use. (Advisory Opinion, I.C.J. Reports 1996 (I), 
p. 257, para. 78.) 

\n\nThe fact that occupation is met by armed resistance cannot be used as 
a pretext to disregard fundamental human rights in the occupied terri- 
tory. Throughout the annals of history, occupation has always been met 
with armed resistance. Violence breeds violence. This vicious circle weighs 
heavily on every action and every reaction by the occupier and the occu- 
pied alike. 
\n\nThe dilemma was pertinently captured by Professors Richard Falk and 
Burns Weston when they wrote the occupier is confronted by threats to its security that arise ... 
primarily, and especially in the most recent period, from a pronounced 
and sustained failure to restrict the character and terminate 
its occupation so as to restore the sovereign rights of the inhabitants. 
Israeli occupation, by its substantial violation of Palestinian rights, 
has itself operated as an inflaming agent that threatens the security 
of its administration of the territory, inducing reliance on more and 
more brutal practices to restore stability which in turn provokes the 
Palestinians even more. In effect, the illegality of the Israeli 
occupation regime itself set off an escalatory spiral of resistance and 
repression, and under these conditions al1 considerations of morality and 
reason establish a right of resistance inherent in the population. This 
right of resistance is an implicit legal corollary of the fundamental 
legal rights associated with the primacy of sovereign identity and 
assuring the humane protection of the inhabitants.


\n\nI wholeheartedly subscribe to the view expressed by Professors Falk 
and Weston, that the breaches by both sides of the fundamental rules of 
humanitarian law reside in the illegality of the Israeli occupation regime 
itself. Occupation, as an illegal and temporary situation, is at the heart 
of the whole problem. The only viable prescription to end the grave 
violations of international humanitarian law is to end occupation.
 
\n\nThe Security Council has more than once called for ending the occupation. 
On 30 June 1980, the Security Council reaffirmed the overriding 
necessity for ending the prolonged occupation of Arab territories 
occupied by Israel since 1967, including Jerusalem (S/RES/476 (1980)). Not- 
withstanding this clarion call, the Palestinians are still languishing under 
a heavy-handed, prolonged occupation. 

\n\n3.2. The Court, in paragraph 135, rejected the contention that the 
principle of military necessity can be invoked to justify the construction 
of the wall. The Court held that: 

\n\nHowever, on the material before it, the Court is not convinced 
that the destructions carried out contrary to the prohibition in 
Article 53 of the Fourth Geneva Convention were rendered absolutely 
necessary by military operations. (Advisory Opinion, para. 135.) 

\n\nIfully share this finding. Military necessities and military exigencies 
could arguably be advanced as justification for building the wall had 
Israel proven that it could perceive no other alternative for safeguarding 
its security. This, as the Court notes, Israel failed to demonstrate. A 
distinction must be drawn between building the wall as a security measure, 
as Israel contends, and accepting that the principle of military necessity 
could be invoked to justify the unwarranted destruction and demolition 
that accompanied the construction process. Military necessity, if 
applicable, extends to the former and not the latter. The magnitude of the 
damage and injury inflicted upon the civilian inhabitants in the course 
of building the wall and its associated régime is clearly prohibited under 
international humanitarian law. The destruction of homes, the demolition 
of the infrastructure, and the despoilment of land, orchards and 
olive groves that has accompanied the construction of the wall cannot 
be justified under any pretext whatsoever. Over 100,000 civilian non- 
combatants have been rendered homeless and hapless.

\n\nIt is a fact that the law of belligerent occupation contains clauses which 
confer on the occupying Power a limited leeway for military necessities 
and security. As in every exception to a general rule, it has to be interpreted 
in a strict manner with a view to preserving the basic humanitarian 
considerations. The Secretary-General reported to the General Assembly 
on 24 November 2003 that he recognizes Israels right and duty to 
protect its people against terrorist attacks. However, that duty should not 
be carried out in a way that is in contradiction to international law ... 
(A/ES-10/248, para. 30.) 

\n\nThe jurisprudence of the Court has been consistent. In the 1949 Corfu 
Channel case, the Court referred to the core and fabric of the rules of 
humanitarian law as elementary considerations of humanity, even more 
exacting in peace than in war (Corfu Channel, Merits, Judgement, 1949, 
I.C.J. Reports 1949, p. 22). In the case concerning Legality of the Threat 
or Use of Nuclear Weapons, the Court held that


\n\nthese fundamental rules are to be observed by all States whether or 
not they have ratified the conventions that contain them, because 
they constitute intransgressible principles of international customary 
law (I.C.J. Reports 1996 (I), p. 257, para. 79). 

\n\nIn the final analysis, I have reached the same conclusion as Professor 
Michael Schmitt, that 

\n\nMilitary necessity operates within this paradigm to prohibit acts 
that are not militarily necessary; it is a principle of limitation, 
not authorization. In its legal sense, military necessity justifies 
nothing. 

\n\nThe Court reached the same conclusion. The Court held that 

\n\nIn the light of the material before it, the Court is not convinced that 
the construction of the wall along the route chosen was the only means 
to safeguard the interests of Israel against the peril which it has invoked 
as justification for that construction. (Advisory Opinion, para. 140.) 

\n\n3.3. It is relevant to recall, moreover, that the reading of the reports by 
the two Special Rapporteurs, John Dugard and Jean Ziegler, leaves no 
doubt that as an occupying Power, Israel has committed grave breaches. 
The pattern and the magnitude of the violations committed against the 
non-combatant civilian population in the ancillary measures associated 
with constructing the wall, are, in my view, extensive destruction and 
appropriation of property, not justified by military necessity and carried 
out unlawfully and wantonly (Fourth Geneva Convention, Art. 147). In 
the area of extending protection to civilians, the rules of international 
humanitarian law have progressively developed since the conclusion of 
the Geneva Conventions and Additional Protocols. It is submitted that 
the Court should have contributed to the development of the rules of jus 
in bello by characterizing the destruction committed in the course of 
building the wall as grave breaches. 
3.4. The Court underlined the paramount importance of the right to 
self-determination in our contemporary world and held in paragraph 88 : 
The Court indeed made it clear that the right of peoples to self-determination 
is today a right erga omnes (see East Timor (Portugal V. Australia), 
Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 1995, p. 102, para. 29). Moreover, the 
Court notes that the route chosen for the wall and the measures taken 
severely impedes the exercise by the Palestinian people of its right to 
self-determination, and is therefore a breach of Israels obligation to 
respect that right (Advisory Opinion, para. 122). This legally authoritative 
dictum, which has my full support, was confined to the reasoning.


\n\nThe legal consequences that flow for all States from measures which 
severely impede the exercise by the Palestinians of an erga omnes right, 
should, in my view, have been included in the dispositif.

\n\nI now approach my final comment. It is a reflection on the future. The 
Court, in paragraph 162, observes that in its view this tragic situation can be brought to an end only through imple- 
mentation in good faith of al1 relevant Security Council resolutions, 
in particular resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) (Advisory 
Opinion, para. 162). 

\n\nThis finding by the Court reflects a lofty objective that has eluded the 
international community for a very long time. Since 22 November 1967, 
all efforts have been aimed at ensuring the implementation of Security 
Council resolution 242 (1967) which was adopted unanimously. In the 
course of its 37-year lifespan, Security Council resolution 242 (1967) has 
been both praised and vilified. Yet detractors and supporters alike agree 
that the balance in its provisions represent the only acceptable basis for 
establishing a viable and just peace. The Security Council, in the after- 
math of the 1973 armed conflict, adopted resolution 338 (1973), which 
called upon the parties concerned to start immediately after the ceasefire 
the implementation of Security Council resolution 242 (1967) in al1 of its 
parts (emphasis added). The obligations emanating from these resolutions 
are obligations of result of paramount importance. They are synallagmatic 
obligations in which the obligation of each party constitutes the 
raison dêtre of the obligation of the other. It is legally wrong and 
politically unsound to transform this obligation of result into a mere 
obligation of means, confining it to a negotiating process. Any attempt to 
tamper with such solemn obligation would not contribute to an outcome 
based on a solid foundation of law and justice. 


\n\nThe establishment of a just and lasting peace, as called for in Security 
Council resolution 242 (1967), necessitates the full implementation of 
the corresponding obligations by the two parties. The Advisory Opinion 
should herald a new era as the first concrete manifestation of a meaningful 
administration of justice related to Palestine. It is hoped that it will 
provide the impetus to steer and direct the long-dormant quest for a just 
peace.