""13. When seised of a request for an advisory opinion, the Court must first 
consider whether it has jurisdiction to give the opinion requested and whether, 
should the answer be in the affirmative, there is any reason why it should 
decline to exercise any such jurisdiction (see Legality of the Threat or Use of 
Nuclear Weapons, Advisory Opinion, I. C. J. Reports 1996 (1), p. 232, para. 10). 

14. The Court will thus first address the question whether it possesses 
jurisdiction to give the advisory opinion requested by the General Assembly 
on 8 December 2003. The competence of the Court in this regard is based on 
Article 65, paragraph l , of its Statute, according to which the Court, according
to which the Court "may give an advisory opinion on any legal question at the request 
of whatever body may be authorized by or in accordance with the 
Charter of the United Nations to make such a request". The Court 
has already had occasion to indicate that:

"It is ... a precondition of the Court's competence that the advisory 
opinion be requested by an organ duly authorized to seek it 
under the Charter, that it be requested on a legal question, and that, 
except in the case of the General Assembly or the Security Council, 
that question should be one arising within the scope of the activities 
of the requesting organ." (Application for Review of Judgement No. 
273 of the United Nations Administrative Tribunal, Advisory Opinion, I.C.J. 
Reports 1982, pp. 333-334, para. 21.) 


15. It is for the Court to satisfy itself that the request for an advisory 
opinion comes from an organ or agency having competence to make it. 
In the present instance, the Court notes that the General Assembly, 
which seeks the advisory opinion, is authorized to do so by Article 96, 
paragraph 1, of the Charter, which provides: "The General Assembly or 
the Security Councill may request the International Court of Justice to 
give an advisory opinion on any legal question." 
  
16. Although the above-mentioned provision states that the General 
Assembly may seek an advisory opinion "on any legal question", the 
Court has sometime:~ in the past given certain indications as to the relationship 
between the question the subject of a request for an advisory 
opinion and the activities of the General Assembly (Interpretation of 
Peace Treaties with Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania, I. C. J. Reports 
1950, p. 70; Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons, I. C. J. 
Reports 1996 (I), pp. 232 and 233, paras. 11 and 12). 
 
17. The Court will so proceed in the present case. The Court would 
observe that Article 10 of the Charter has conferred upon the General 
Assembly a competence relating to "any questions or any matters" within 
the scope of the Charter, and that Article 11, paragraph 2, has specifically 
provided it with competence on "questions relating to the maintenance of 
international peace and security brought before it by any Member of the 
United Nations . . ." and to make recommendations under certain conditions 
fixed by those: Articles. As will be explained below, the question of 
the construction of the wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory was 
brought before the General Assembly by a number of Member States in 
the context of the 1Tenth Emergency Special Session of the Assembly, 
convened to deal with what the Assembly, in its resolution ES-1012 of 
25 April 1997, considered to constitute a threat to international peace 
and security  


18. Before further examining the problems of jurisdiction that have 
been raised in the present proceedings, the Court considers it necessary to 
describe the events that led to the adoption of resolution ES-10114, by 
which the General assembly requested an advisory opinion on the legal 
consequences of the construction of the wall in the Occupied Palestinian 
Territory. 

19. The Tenth Emergency Special Session of the General Assembly, at 
which that resolution was adopted, was first convened following the 
rejection by the Security Council, on 7 March and 21 March 1997, as a 
result of negative votes by a permanent member, of two draft resolutions 
concerning certain Israeli settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory 
(see, respectively, SI19971199 and SIPV.3747, and SI19971241 and 
SlPV.3756). By a letter of 31 March 1997, the Chairman of the Arab 
Group then requested "that an emergency special session of the General 
Assembly be convened pursuant to resolution 377 A (V) entitled 'Uniting
for Peace' " with a view to discussing "Illegal Israeli actions in occupied 
East Jerusalem and the rest of the Occupied Palestinian Territory" (letter 
dated 31 March 199'7 from the Permanent Representative of Qatar to the 
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General, AIES-1011, 22 April 
1997, Annex). The majority of Members of the United Nations having 
concurred in this request, the first meeting of the Tenth Emergency Special 
Session of the General Assembly took place on 24 April 1997 (see 
AIES-1011, 22 April 1997). Resolution ES-1012 was adopted the following 
day; the General Assembly thereby expressed its conviction that : 

"the repeated violation by Israel, the occupying Power, of international 
law and its failure to comply with relevant Security Council 
and General Assembly resolutions and the agreements reached 
between the parties undermine the Middle East peace process and 
constitute a threat to international peace and security",
 
and condemned the "illegal Israeli actions" in occupied East Jerusalem 
and the rest of the Occupied Palestinian Territory, in particular the 
construction of settlements in that territory. The Tenth Emergency Special 
Session was then adjourned temporarily and has since been reconvened 
11 times (on 15 July 1997, 13 November 1997, 17 March 1998, 5 February 
1999, 18 October 2000, 20 December 2001, 7 May 2002, 5 August 
2002, 19 September 2003, 20 October 2003 and 8 December 2003). 

20. By a letter dated 9 October 2003, the Chairman of the Arab 
Group, on behalf of the States Members of the League of Arab States, 
requested an immediate meeting of the Security Council to consider the 
"grave and ongoing Israeli violations of international law, including 
international humanitarian law, and to take the necessary measures in 
this regard" (letter ol-9 October 2003 from the Permanent Representative 
of the Syrian Arab Republic to the United Nations to the President of 
the Security Council. Sl20031973, 9 October 2003). This letter was accompanied
by a draft resolution for consideration by the Council, which condemned 
as illegal the construction by Israel of a wall in the Occupied 
Palestinian Territory departing from the Armistice Line of 1949. The 
Security Council held its 4841 st and 4842nd meetings on 14 October 2003 
to consider the item entitled "The situation in the Middle East, including 
the Palestine question". It then had before it another draft resolution 
proposed on the same day by Guinea, Malaysia, Pakistan and the Syrian 
Arab Republic, which also condemned the construction of the wall. This 
latter draft resolution was put to a vote after an open debate and was not 
adopted owing to the negative vote of a permanent member of the Council (SlPV.484 1 and SlPV.4842).

On 15 October 2003, the Chairman of the Arab Group, on behalf of 
the States Members of the League of Arab States, requested the resumption 
of the Tenth Emergency Special Session of the General Assembly to 
consider the item of "Illegal Israeli actions in Occupied East Jerusalem 
and the rest of the Occupied Palestinian Territory" (AIES-101242); this 
request was supported by the Non-Aligned Movement (AIES-101243) 
and the Organization of the Islamic Conference Group at the United 
Nations (AIES-101244). The Tenth Emergency Special Session resumed 
its work on 20 October 2003.   


21. On 27 October 2003, the General Assembly adopted resolution ES -
10/13, by which it demanded that  

"Israel stop and reverse the construction of the wall in the Occupied 
Palestinian Territory, including in and around East Jerusalem, which is 
in departure of the Armistice Line of 1949 and is in contradiction to 
relevant provisions of international law" (p ara. l). 
 
In paragraph 3, the Assembly requested the Secretary -General  
"to report on compliance with the .  resolution periodically, with the 
first report on compliance with paragraph I [of that resolution] to be 
submitted within one month ...".
  
The Tenth Emergency Special Session was temporarily adjourned and, on 24 
November 2003, the report of the Secretary -General prepared pursuant to 
General Assembly resolution ES -10/13 (hereinafter the "report of the 
Secretary -General") was issued (A/ES -10/24 8).

 
22. Meanwhile, on 19 November 2003, the Security Council adopted 
resolution 1515 (2003), by which it "Endorse[d] the Quartet Performance -
based Roadmap to a Permanent Two -State Solution to the Israeli - Palestinian 
Conflict". The Quartet consists of representative s of the United States of 
America, the European Union, the Russian Federation and the United 
Nations. That resolution
  
"Call[ed] on the parties to fulfil their obligations under the Roadmap 
in cooperation with the Quartet and to achieve the vision of two States 
living side by side in peace and security."
  
Neither the "Roadmap" nor resolution 1515 (2003) contained any specific 
provision concerning the construction of the wall, which was not discussed 
by the Security Council in this context.  

23. Nineteen days later, on 8 December 2003, the Tenth Emergency 
Special Session of the General Assembly again resumed its work, following 
a new request by the Chairman of the Arab Group, on behalf of the States 
Members of the League of Arab States, and pursuant to resolution ES -10/13 
(letter dated I December 2003 to the President of the General Assembly from 
the Charge d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Kuwait to the United Nations,
A/ES -10/249, 2 December 2003). It was 
during the meeting convened on that day that resolution ES - 10/14 requesting 
the present advisory opinion was adopted.  

24. Having thus recalled the sequence of events that led to the adoption 
of resolution ES - 10/14, the Court will now turn to the questions of jurisdiction 
that have been raised in the present proceedings. First, Israel has alleged that, 
given the active engagement of the Security Council with the situation in the 
Middle East, including the Palestinian question, the General Assembly acted 
ultra vires under the Charter when it requested an advisory opinion on the 
legal consequences of the  construction of the wall in the Occupied Palestinian 
Territory.  

25. The Court has already indicated that the subject of the present request 
for an advisory opinion falls within the competence of the General Assembly 
under the Charter (see paragraphs 15 -17 above). However, Article 12, 
paragraph 1 , of the Charter provides that:
 
"While the Security Council is exercising in respect of any dispute or 
situation the functions assigned to it in the present Charter, the General 
Assembly shall not make any recommendation with regard to that dispute 
or situation unless the Security Council so requests. "
  
A request for an advisory opinion is not in itself a "recommendation" by the 
General Assembly "with regard to aa] dispute or situation". It has however been 
argued in this case that the adoption by the General Assembly of resolution ES -
10/14 was ultra vire s as not in accordance with Article 12. The Court thus 
considers that it is appropriate for it to examine the significance of that Article, 
having regard to the relevant texts and the practice of the United Nations.  


26. Under Article 24 of the Charter the Security Council has "primary 
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security" In that 
regard it can impose on States "an explicit obligation of compliance if for 
example it issues an order or command ... under Chapter VII" and can, to that 
end, "require enforcement by coercive action " (Certain Expenses of the 
United Nations (Article 17, paragraph 2, of the Charter), Advisory Opinion, 
I. C'. J. Reports 1962, p. 163). However, the Court would emphasize that 
Article 24 refers to a primary, but not necessarily exclusive, competence. The 
General Assembly does have the power, inter alias under Article 14 of the 
Charter, to "recommend measures for the peaceful adjustment" of various 
situations (ibid.).
  
"[T]he only limitation which Article 14 imposes on the (General  
Assembly is the restriction found in Article 12, namely, that the 
Assembly should not recommend measures while the Security Council 
is dealing with the same matter unless the Council requests it to do so." 
(I.C.J. Reports 1962, p. 163.) 

 
27. As regards the practice of the United Nations, both the General  
Assembly and the Security Council initially interpreted and applied Article 
12 to the effect that the Assembly could not make a recommendation on a 
question concerning the maintenance of international peace and security 
while the matter remained on the Council's agenda. Thus the Assembly 
during its fourth session refused to recommend certain measures on the 
question of Indonesia, on the ground, inter alia, that the Council remained 
seised of the matter (Official Records of the General Assembly, Fourth 
Session, Ad Hoc Political Committee, Summary Records of Meetings, 27 
September -7 December 1949, 56th Meeting, 3 December 1949, p. 339, para. 
118). As for the Council, on a number of occasions it deleted items from its 
agenda in order to enable the Assembly to deliberate on them (for example, 
in respect of the Spanish question (Official Records of the Security Council, 
First Year: Second Series, No. 21, 79th Meeting, 4 November 1946, p. 498), 
in connection with incidents on the Greek border (Official Records of the 
Security Council, Second Year,  No. 89, 202nd Meeting, 15 September 1947, 
pp. 2404 -2405) and in regard to the Island of Taiwan (Formosa) (Official 
Records of the Security Council, Fifth Year, No. 48, 506th Meeting, 29 
September 1950, p. 5)). In the case of the Republic of Korea, the Council 
decided on 31 January 1951 to remove the relevant item from the list of 
matters of which it was seised in order to enable the Assembly to deliberate 
on the matter (Official Records of the Security Council, Sixth Year, S/PV .531, 
531st Meeting, 31 January 1951, pp. 11 -12, para. 57).
  
However, this interpretation of Article 12 has evolved subsequently. Thus 
the General Assembly deemed itself entitled in 1961 to adopt 
recommendations in the matter of the Congo (resolutions 1955 (XV) and 
1600 (XVI)) and in 1963 in respect of the Portuguese colonies (resolution 
1913 (XVIII)) while those cases still appeared on the Council's agenda, 
without the Council having adopted any recent resolution concerning them. 
In response to a question posed by Peru during the twenty -third session of 
the General Assembly, the Legal Counsel of the United Nations confirmed 
that the Assembly interpreted the words "is exercising the functions" in 
Article 12 of the Charter as meaning "is exercising the functions at this 
moment" (General Assembly, Twenty -third Session, Third Committee, 
1637th meeting, A/C.3/SR.1637, para. 9). Indeed, the Court notes that there 
has been an increasing tendency over time for the General Assembly and the 
Security Council to deal in parallel with the same matter concerning the 
maintenance of international peace and security (see, for example, the 
matters involving Cyprus, South Africa, Angola, Southern Rhodesia and 
more recently Bosnia and Herzegovina and Somalia). It is often the case that, 
while the Security Council has tended to 
focus on the aspects of such matters related to international peace and security, 
the General Assembly has taken a broader view, considering also their 
humanitarian, social and e conomic aspects.  
28. The Court considers that the accepted practice of the General 
Assembly, as it has evolved, is consistent with Article 12, paragraph l, of the 
Charter.  
The Court is accordingly of the view that the General Assembly, in adopting 
resolution ES -10/14, seeking an advisory opinion from the Court, did not "
contravene the provisions of Article 12, paragraph l , of the Charter. The Court 
concludes that by submitting that request the General Assembly did not exceed 
its competence.
  
29. It has however been contended before the Court that the present 
request for an advisory opinion did not fulfil the essential conditions set by 
resolution 377 A (V), under which the Tenth Emergency Special Session was 
convened and has continued to act. In t his regard, it has been said, first, that 
"The Security Council was never seised of a draft resolution proposing that 
the Council itself should request an advisory opinion from the Court on the 
matters now in contention", and, that specific issue having thus never been 
brought before the Council, the General Assembly could not rely on any 
inaction by the Council to make such a request. Secondly, it has been claimed 
that, in adopting resolution 1515 (2003), which endorsed the "Roadmap", 
before the adoption b y the General Assembly of resolution ES -10/14, the 
Security Council continued to exercise its responsibility for the maintenance 
of international peace and security and that, as a result, the General Assembly 
was not entitled to act in its place. The validity of the procedure followed by 
the Tenth Emergency Special Session, especially the Session's "rolling 
character" and the fact that its meeting was convened to deliberate on the 
request for the advisory opinion at the same time as the General Assembly was  
meeting in regular session, has also been questioned. 
 
30. The Court would recall that resolution 377 A (V) states that:
   
"if the Security Council, because of lack of unanimity of the permanent 
members, fails to exercise its primary responsibility for the maintenance 
of international peace and security in any case where there appears to be 
a threat to the peace, breach of the peace, or act of aggression, the General 
Assembly shall consider the matter immediately with a view to making 
appropriate recommendations to Members for collective measures ... ".
  
The procedure provided for by that resolution is premised on two conditions, 
namely that the Council has failed to exercise its primary responsibility for the 
maintenance of international peace and security as a result of a negative vote 
of one or more permanent members, and that the situation is one in which there 
appears to be a threat to the peace, breach of the 
peace, or act of aggression. The Court must accordingly ascertain whether 
these conditions were fulfilled as regards the convening of the Tenth 
Emergency Special Session of the General Assembly, in particular at the time 
when the Assembly decided to request an advisory opinion from the Court.  

31. In the light of the sequence of events described in paragraphs 18 to 23 
above, the Court observes that, at the time when the Tenth Emergency Special 
Session was convened in 1997, the Council had been unable to take a decision 
on the case of certain Israeli  settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, 
due to negative votes of a permanent member; and that, as indicated in 
resolution ES -10/2 (see paragraph 19 above), there existed a threat to 
international peace and security.  "

The Court further notes that, on 20 October 2003, the Tenth Emergency 
Special Session of the General Assembly was reconvened on the same basis 
as in 1997 (see the statements by the representatives of Palestine and Israel, 
A/ES -10/PV .21, pp. 2 and 5), after  the rejection by the Security Council, on 
14 October 2003, again as a result of the negative vote of a permanent member, 
of a draft resolution concerning the construction by Israel of the wall in the 
Occupied Palestinian Territory. The Court considers that the Security Council 
again failed to act as contemplated in resolution 377 A (V). It does not appear 
to the Court that the situation in this regard changed between 20 October 2003 
and 8 December 2003, since the Council neither discussed the construction of 
the wall nor adopted any resolution in that connection. Thus, the Court is of 
the view that, up to 8 December 2003, the Council had not reconsidered the 
negative vote of 14 October 2003. It follows that, during that period, the Tenth 
Emergency Special Session was duly reconvened and could properly be 
seised, under resolution 377 A (V), of the matter now before the Court.  


32. The Court would also emphasize that, in the course of this Emergency 
Special Session, the General Assembly could adopt any resolution falling 
within the subject -matter for which the Session had been convened, and 
otherwise within its powers, including a re solution seeking the Court's 
opinion. It is irrelevant in that regard that no proposal had been made to the 
Security Council to request such an opinion.
  
33. Turning now to alleged further procedural irregularities of the Tenth 
Emergency Special Session, the Court does not consider that the "rolling" 
character of that Session, namely the fact of its having been convened in April 
1997 and reconvened 11 times since then, has any relevance with regard to the 
validity of the request by the General Assembly. The Court observes in that 
regard that the Seventh Emergency Special Session of the General Assembly, 
having been convened on 22 July 198(), was subsequently reconvened four 
times (on 2() April 1982, 25 June  
1982, 16 August 1982 and 24 September 1982), and that the validity of 
resolutions or decisions of the Assembly adopted under such circumstances 
was never disputed. Nor has the validity of any previous resolutions adopted 
during the Tenth Emergency Special Session been challenged.  

34. The Court also notes the contention by Israel that it was improper to 
reconvene the Tenth Emergency Special Session at a time when the regular 
session of the General Assembly was in progress. The Court considers that, 
while it may not have been originally contemplated that it would be 
appropriate for the General Assembly to hold simultaneous emergency and 
regular sessions, no rule of the Organization has been identified which would 
be thereby violated, so as to render invalid the resolution adopting the pre sent 
request for an advisory opinion.
  
35. Finally, the Tenth Emergency Special Session appears to have been 
convened in accordance with Rule 9 (b) of the Rules of Procedure of the 
General Assembly, and the relevant meetings have been convened in 
pursuance of the applicable rules. As the Court stat ed in its Advisory Opinion 
of 21 June 1971 concerning the Legal Consequences for States of the
Continued Presence of South Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) 
notwithstanding Security Council Resolution 276 (1970), a
  
"resolution of a properly constituted organ of the United Nations which 
is passed in accordance with that organ's rules of procedure, and is 
declared by its President to have been so passed, must be presumed to 
have been validly adopted" (I. C. J. Reports 1971, p. 22, para. 20).
  
In view of the foregoing, the Court cannot see any reason why that 
presumption is to be rebutted in the present case.  


36. The Court now turns to a further issue related to jurisdiction in the 
present proceedings., namely the contention that the request for an advisory 
opinion by the General Assembly is not on a "legal question" within the 
meaning of Article 96, paragraph l, o f the Charter and Article 65, paragraph l, 
of the Statute of the Court. It has been contended in this regard that, for a 
question to constitute a "legal question" for the purposes of these two 
provisions, it must be reasonably specific, since otherwise it would not be 
amenable to a response by the Court. With regard to the request made in the 
present advisory proceedings, it has been argued that it is not possible to 
determine with reasonable certainty the legal meaning of the question asked 
of the Court fo r two reasons.  

First, it has been argued that the question regarding the "legal 
consequences" of the construction of the wall only allows for two possible 
interpretations, each of which would lead to a course of action that is  

precluded for the Court. The question asked could first be interpreted as a 
request for the Court to find that the construction of the wall is illegal, and then 
to give its opinion on the legal consequences of that illegality. In this case, it 
has been con tended, the Court should decline to respond to the question asked 
for a variety of reasons, some of which pertain to jurisdiction and others rather 
to the issue of propriety. As regards jurisdiction, it is said that, if the General 
Assembly had wished to obtain the view of the Court on the highly complex 
and sensitive question of the legality of the construction of the wall, it should 
have expressly sought an opinion to that effect (cf. Exchange of Greek and 
Turkish Populations, Advisory Opinion, 1925, P. C .I. J. , Series B, No. 10, p. 
17). A second possible interpretation of the request, it is said, is that the Court 
should assume that the construction of the wall is illegal, and then give its 
opinion on the legal consequences of that assumed illegality. It  has been 
contended that the Court should also decline to respond to the question on this 
hypothesis, since the request would then be based on a questionable assumption 
and since, in any event, it would be impossible to rule on the legal 
consequences of il legality without specifying the nature of that illegality.

Secondly, it has been contended that the question asked of the Court is not 
of a "legal" character because of its imprecision and abstract nature. In 
particular, it has been argued in this regard that the question fails to specify 
whether the Court is bein g asked to address legal consequences for "the 
General Assembly or some other organ of the United Nations", "Member 
States of the United Nations", Israel", "Palestine" or "some combination of the 
above, or some different entity".
  
37. As regards the alleged lack of clarity of the terms of the General 
Assembly's request and its effect on the "legal nature" of the question referred 
to the Court, the Court observes that this question is directed to the legal 
consequences arising from a given factual situation considering the rules and 
principles of international law, including the Geneva Convention relative to 
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War of 12 August 1949 
(hereinafter the "Fourth Geneva Convention") and relevant Security Council 
and General Assembly resolutions. The question submitted by the General 
Assembly has thus, to use the Court's phrase in its Advisory Opinion on 
Western Sahara, "been framed in terms of law and raise[s] problems of 
international law"; it is by it s very nature susceptible of a reply based on law; 
indeed it is scarcely susceptible of a reply otherwise than on the basis of law. 
In the view of the Court, it is indeed a question of a legal character (see 
Western Sahara, Advisory Opinion, 1. C..J. Reports 1975, p. 18, para. 15). 
 
38. The Court would point out that lack of clarity in the drafting of a 
question does not deprive the Court of jurisdiction. Rather, such uncertainty 
will require clarification in interpretation, and such necessary 
clarifications of interpretation have frequently been given by the Court.  
In the past, both the Permanent Court and the present Court have observed 
in some cases that the wording of a request for an advisory opinion did not 
accurately state the question on which the Court's opinion was being 
sought (Interpretation Q/• the Greco -Turkish Agreement of I December 
1926 (Final Protocol, Article IV), Advisory Opinion, 1928, P. C.I. J. , Series 
B, No. 16 (I), pp. 14 -16), or did not correspond to the "true legal question" 
under consideration (Interpretation Q/' the Agreement of 25 March 1951 
between the WII() and Egypt, Advisory Opinion, I. C. J. Reports 1980, pp. 87 -
89, paras. 34 -36). The Court noted in one case that "the question put to the 
Court is, on the face of it, at once infelicitously expressed and vague" 
(Application for Review of Judgement No. 273 of the United Nations 
Administrative Tribunal, Advisory Opinion, I. C. J. Reports 1982, p. 348, para. 
46). 

Consequently, the Court has often been required to broaden, interpret and 
even reformulate the questions put (see the three Opinions cited above; see 
also Jaworzina, Advisory' Opinion, 1923, P. C.I. J. , Series B, No. 8; 
Admissibility of Hearings of Petitioners by the Committee on South West 
Africa, Advisory Opinion, I. C. J. Reports 1956, p. 25; Certain Expenses of 
the United Nations (Article 17, paragraph 2, of the Charter), Advisory 
Opinion, I. C. J. Reports 1962, pp. 157 -162).  
In the present instance, the Court will only have to do what it has often done 
in the past, namely "identify the existing principles and rules, interpret them 
and apply them ..., thus offering a reply to the question posed based on law" 
(Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons, I. C. J. Reports 1996 ( I), 
p. 234, para. 13).  

39. In the present instance, if the General Assembly requests the Court to 
state the "legal consequences" arising from the construction of the wall, the 
use of these terms necessarily encompasses an assessment of whether that 
construction is or is not in b reach of certain rules and principles of 
international law. Thus, the Court is first called upon to determine whether 
such rules and principles have been and are still being breached by the 
construction of the wall along the planned route.  


40. The Court does not consider that what is contended to be the abstract 
nature of the question posed to it raises an issue of jurisdiction. Even when the 
matter was raised as an issue of propriety rather than one of jurisdiction, in the 
case concerning the Legality of the Threat or Use o/ Nuclear Weapons, the Court 
took the position that to contend that it should not deal with a question couched 
in abstract terms is "a mere affirmation devoid of any justification" and that 
"the Court may give an advisory op inion on any legal question, abstract or 
otherwise" (l. C". J. Reports 1996 ( I), p. 236, para. 15, referring to Conditions 
of Admission of a State to Membership in the United Nations (Article 4 of 
the Charter), Advisory Opinion, 1948, I. C.I Reports 1947 -1948, p. 61 ; of 
Awards o/' Compensation Made by the United Nations Administrative 
Tribunal, Advisory Opinion, I. C.I. Reports 1954, p. 5 1 ; and Legal Consequences for
States the Continued Presence of South Africa in Namibia 
(South West Africa) notwithstanding Security Council Resolution 276 
(1970), Advisory Opinion, I. C. J. Reports 1971, p. 27, para. 40). In any event, 
the Court considers that the question posed to it in relation to the legal 
consequences of the construction of the wall is not an abstract one, and 
moreover that it would be for the Court to determine for whom any such 
consequences arise.  


41. Furthermore, the Court cannot accept the view, which has also been 
advanced in the present proceedings, that it has no jurisdiction because of the 
"political" character of the question posed. As is clear from its long -standing 
jurisprudence on this point, the Court considers that the fact that a legal 
question also has political aspects,
  
"as, in the nature of things, is the case with so many questions which arise 
in international life, does not suffice to deprive it of its character as a 'legal 
question' and to 'deprive the Court of a competence expressly conferred 
on it by its Statute' (Application for Review of Judgement No. 158 of the 
United Nations Administrative Tribunal, Advisory Opinion, I. C. J. 
Reports 1973, p. 172, para. 14). Whatever its political aspects, the Court 
cannot refuse to admit the legal character of a question which invites it to 
discharge an essentially judicial task, namely, an assessment of the legality 
of the possible conduct of States with regard to the obligations 
imposed upon them by international law (cf.. Conditions of Admission of 
a State to Membership in the United Nations (Article 4 of the Charter), 
Advisory Opinion, 1948, I.C.J. Report s 1947 -1948, pp. 61 -62; 
Competence of the General Assembly for the Admission of the a State to the 
United Nations, Advisory Opinion, I. C. J. Reports 1950, pp. 6 -7; Certain 
Expenses of the United Nations (Article 17, paragraph 2, of the Charter), 
Advisory Opinion, I. C. J. Reports 1962, p. 155)." (Legality of the Threat 
or Use of Nuclear Weapons, Advisory Opinion, I. C. J. Reports 1996 (I), 
p. 234, para. 13.)
  
In its Opinion concerning the Interpretation of the Agreement of25 March 
1951 between the WHO and Egypt, the Court indeed emphasized that,  
in situations in which political considerations are prominent it may be 
particularly necessary for an international organization to obtain an 
advisory opinion from the Court as to the legal principles applicable with 
respect to the matter under debate . (l . c.]. Reports 1980, p. 87, para. 33).  
Moreover, the Court has affirmed in its Opinion on the Legality of the Threat 
or Use of Nuclear Weapons that  
"the political nature of the motives which may be said to have inspired 
the request and the political implications that the opinion given might 
have are of no relevance in the establishment of its jurisdiction to give 
such an opinion" (l. c. J. Reports 19 96 (I), p. 234, para. 13).  
The Court is of the view that there is no element in the present proceedings 
which could lead it to conclude otherwise.  

42. The Court accordingly has jurisdiction to give the advisory opinion 
requested by resolution ES -10/14 of the General Assembly.  
""
