149. The Court notes that Israel is first obliged to comply with the 
international obligations it has breached by the construction of the wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory (see paragraphs 114-137 above). 
Consequently, Israel is bound to comply with it s obligation to respect the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination and its obligations under international humanitarian law and international human rights law. 
Furthermore, it must ensure freedom of access to the Holy Places that came 
under its control following the 1967 War (see paragraph 129 above).  

150. The Court observes that Israel also has an obligation to put an end to 
the violation of its international obligations flowing from the construction of the wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory. The obligation of a State responsible for an internationally wrongful act to put an end to that act is well established in general international law, and the Court has on a number of occasions confirmed the existence of that obligation (Mililary and Paramililary Activities in and against Nicaragua (Nicaragua v. United States of America), Merits, Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 1986, p. 149; United States Diplomatic and Consular Staff in Tehran, Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 1980, p. 44, para. 95; Haya de la Torre, Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 1951, p. 82).  

151. Israel accordingly has the obligation to cease forthwith the works of 
construction of the wall being built by it in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including in and around East Jerusalem. Moreover, in view of the Court's finding (see paragraph 143 above) that Israel's violations of  
its international obligations stem from the construction of the wall and from its associated régime, cessation of those violations entails the dismantling forthwith of those parts of that structure situated within the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including in and around East Jerusalem. All legislative and regulatory acts adopted with a view to its construction, and to the establishment of its associated régime, must forthwith be repealed or rendered ineffective, except in so far as such acts, by providing for compensation or other forms of reparation for the Palestinian population, may continue to be relevant for compliance by Israel with the obligations referred to in paragraph 153 below.

152. Moreover, given that the construction of the wall in the Occupied 
Palestinian Territory has, inter alia, entailed the requisition and destruction of homes, businesses and agricultural holdings, the Court finds further that Israel has the obligation to make reparation for the damage caused to all the natural or legal persons concerned. The Court would recall that the essential forms of reparation in customary law were laid down by the Permanent Court of International Justice in the following terms :

"The essential principle contained in the actual notion of an illegal act 
a principle which seems to be established by international practice and in 
particular by the decisions of arbitral tribunals — is that reparation must, as far as possible, wipe out all the consequences of the illegal act and reestablish the situation which would, in all probability, have existed if that act had not been committed. Restitution in kind, or, if this is not 
possible, payment of a sum corresponding to the value which a restitution 
in kind would bear; the award, if need be, of damages for loss sustained 
which would not be covered by restitution in kind or payment in place of 
it such are the principles which should serve to determine the amount of 
compensation due for an act contrary to international law."(Factory at  
Chorzów, Merits, Judgment No. 13, 1928, P.C.I.J. , Series A, No. 17, p. 
47.)

153. Israel is accordingly under an obligation to return the land, orchards, olive groves and other immovable property seized from any natural or legal person for purposes of construction of the wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory. In the event that such  restitution should prove to be materially impossible, Israel has an obligation to compensate the persons in question for the damage suffered. The Court considers that Israel also has an obligation to compensate, in accordance with the applicable rules of international law, all natural or legal persons having suffered any form of material damage as a result of the wall's construction.  

154. The Court will now consider the legal consequences of the 
internationally wrongful acts flowing from Israel's construction of the wall as regards other States.