\n\nSEPARATE OPINION OF JUDGE HIGGINS 
\n\n1. I agree with the Opinion of the Court as regards its jurisdiction in 
the present case and believe that paragraphs 14-42 correctly answer the 
various contrary arguments that have been raised on this point. 
\n\n2. The question of discretion and propriety is very much harder. 
Although ultimately I have voted in favour of the decision to give the 
Opinion, I do think matters are not as straightforward as the Court 
suggests. It is apparent (not least from the wording of the request to 
the Court) that an attempt has been made by those seeking the Opinion 
to assimilate the Opinion on the wall to that obtained from the Court 
regarding Namibia (Legal Consequences for States of the Continued 
Presence of South Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding 
Security Council Resolution 276 (1970), Advisory Opinion, I. C. J. 
Reports 1971, p. 12). I believe this to be incorrect for several reasons. 
First and foremost, there was already, at the time of the request for an 
opinion in 1971 on the legal consequences of certain acts, a series of 
Court Opinions on South West Africa which made clear what were South 
Africa's legal obligations (International Status of South West Africa, 
Advisory Opinion, I.C.J. Reports 1950, p. 128; Voting Procedure on 
Questions relating to Reports and Petitions concerning the Territory of 
South West Africa, Advisory Opinion, I. C. J. Reports 1955, p. 67; Admissibility 
of Hearings of Petitioners by the Committee on South West 
Africa, Advisory Opinion, I.C. J. Reports 1956, p. 23). Further, all the 
legal obligations as mandatory Power lay with South West Africa. There 
were no legal obligations, still less unfulfilled obligations, which in 1971 
lay also upon South-West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO), as the 
representative of the Namibian people.
\n\n3. In the present case, it is the General Assembly, and not the Court, 
which has made any prior pronouncements in respect of legality. Further, 
in contrast to how matters stood as regards Namibia in 1971, the larger 
intractable problem (of which the wall may be seen as an element) cannot 
be regarded as one in which one party alone has been already classified 
by a court as the legal wrongdoer; where it is for it alone to act to restore 
a situation of legality; and where from the perspective of legal obligation 
there is nothing remaining for the other party to do. That is evident 
from the long history of the matter, and is attested to by Security Council 
resolutions 242 (1967) and 1515 (2003) alike. 
\n\n4. In support of the misconceived analogy - which serves both to 
assist so far as legal issues of discretion are concerned, as well as wider 
purposes - counsel have informed the Court that The problem ... is a 
problem between one State - Israel - and the United Nations. (See for 
example, CR2004/3, p. 62, para. 31.) Of course, assimilation to the 
Namibia case, and a denial of any dispute save as between Israel and the 
United Nations, would also avoid the necessity to meet the criteria enunciated 
by the Court when considering whether it should give an opinion 
where a dispute exists between two States. But, as will be elaborated 
below, this cannot be avoided 
\n\n5. Moreover, in the Namibia Opinion the Assembly sought legal advice 
on the consequences of its own necessary decisions on the matter in hand. 
The General Assembly was the organ in which now the power to terminate 
a League of Nations mandate was located. The Mandate was duly 
terminated. But Assembly resolutions are in most cases only recommendations. 
The Security Council, which in certain circumstances can pass 
binding resolutions under Chapter VII of the Charter, was not the organ 
with responsibility over mandates. This conundrum was at the heart of 
the opinion sought of the Court. Here, too, there is no real analogy with 
the present case. 
\n\n6. We are thus in different legal terrain - in the familiar terrain where 
there is a dispute between parties, which fact does not of itself mean that 
the Court should not exercise its competence, provided certain conditions 
are met. 
\n\n7. Since 1948 Israel has been in dispute, first with its Arab neighbours 
(and other Arab States) and, in more recent years, with the Palestinian 
Authority. Both Israel's written observations on this aspect (7.4-7.7) and 
the report of the Secretary-General, with its reference to the Summary 
Legal Position of each side, attest to this reality. The Court has 
regarded the special status of Palestine, though not yet an independent 
State, as allowing it to be invited to participate in these proceedings. 
There is thus a dispute between two international actors, and the advisory 
opinion request bears upon one element of it. 
\n\n8. That of itself does not suggest that the Court should decline to exercise 
jurisdiction on grounds of propriety. It is but a starting point for 
the Court's examination of the issue of discretion. A series of advisory 
opinion cases have explained how the Status of Eastern Carelia, Advisory 
Opinion, 1923 (P. C. I. J., Series B, No. 5) principle should properly be 
read. Through the Certain Expenses of the United Nations (Article 17, 
paragraph 2, of the Charter), Advisory Opinion (I. C. J. Reports 1962, 
p. 151); the Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of
South Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding Security 
Council Resolution 276 (1970), Advisory Opinion (I. C. J. Reports 19 71, 
p. 12); and, most clearly, the Western Sahara, Advisory Opinion (I.C.J. 
Reports 1975, p. 12), the ratio decidendi of Status of Eastern Carelia has 
been explained. Of these the Western Sahara case provides by far the 
most pertinent guidance, as it involved a dispute between international 
actors, in which the Court had not itself already given several advisory 
opinions (cf. the Namibia Opinion, which was given against the back- 
ground of three earlier ones on issues of legality).
\n\n9. The Court did not in the Western Sahara case suggest that the con- 
sent principle to the settlement of disputes in advisory opinions had now 
lost all relevance for all who are United Nations Members. It was saying 
no more than the particular factors underlying the ratio decidendi of 
Status of Eastern Carelia were not present. But other factors had to be 
considered to see if propriety is met in giving an advisory opinion when 
the legal interests of a United Nations Member are the subject of that 
advice. 
\n\n10. Indeed, in the Western Sahara case the Court, after citing the oft- 
quoted dictum from Interpretation of Peace Treaties with Bulgaria, Hungary
and Romania, First Phase, Advisory Opinion, that an opinion given 
to a United Nations organ 'represents its participation in the activities of 
the Organization, and, in principle, should not be refused' (I. C. J. Reports 
1950, p. 71), went on to affirm that nonetheless: 
'lack of consent might constitute a ground for declining to give the 
opinion requested if, in the circumstances of a given case, considerations 
of judicial propriety should oblige the Court to refuse an 
opinion. In short, the consent of an interested State continues to 
be relevant, not for the Court's competence, but for the appreciation 
of the propriety of giving an opinion. 
In certain circumstances. therefore. the lack of consent of an interested 
State may render the' giving of an advisory opinion incompatible with the 
Court's judicial character. (Western Sahara, Advisory Opinion, I. C. J. Reports 1975, p. 25, paras. 32-33.) 
\n\n11. What then are the conditions that in the Western Sahara case were 
found to make it appropriate for the Court to give an opinion even where 
a dispute involving a United Nations Member existed? One such was that 
a United Nations Member: 
could not validly object, to the General Assembly's exercise of 
its powers to deal with the decolonization of a non-self-governing 
territory and to seek an opinion on questions relevant to the exercise 
of those powers (ibid., p. 24, para. 30).Although the Assembly is 
not exercising either the powers of a mandate 
supervisory body (as in Namibia) or a body decolonizing a non-self- 
governing territory (as in Western Sahara), the Court correctly recounts 
at paragraphs 48-50 the long-standing special institutional interest of 
the United Nations in the dispute, of which the building of the wall now 
represents an element. 
\n\n12. There remains, however, a further condition to be fulfilled, which 
the Court enunciated in the Western Sahara case. It states that it was 
satisfied that: 
The object of the General Assembly has not been to bring before 
the Court, by way of a request for advisory opinion, a dispute or 
legal controversy, in order that it may later, on the basis of the 
Court's opinion, exercise its powers and functions for the peaceful 
settlement of that dispute or controversy. The object of the request is 
an entirely different one: to obtain from the Court an opinion which 
the General Assembly deems of assistance to it for the proper exercise 
of its functions concerning the decolonization of the territory. 
(Western Sahara, Advisory Opinion, I. C. J. Reports 1975, pp. 26-27, para. 39.) 
In the present case it is the reverse circumstance that obtains. The request 
is not in order to secure advice on the Assembly's decolonization duties, 
but later, on the basis of our Opinion, to exercise powers over the dispute 
or controversy. Many participants in the oral phase of this case frankly 
emphasized this objective. 
\n\n13. The Court has not dealt with this point at all in that part of its 
Opinion on propriety. Indeed, it is strikingly silent on the matter, avoiding 
mention of the lines cited above and any response as to their application 
to the present case. To that extent, this Opinion by its very silence 
essentially revises, rather than applies, the existing case law. 
\n\n14. There is a further aspect that has been of concern to me so far as 
the issue of propriety is concerned. The law, history and politics of the 
Israel-Palestine dispute is immensely complex. It is inherently awkward 
for a court of law to be asked to pronounce upon one element within a 
multifaceted dispute, the other elements being excluded from its view. 
Context is usually important in legal determinations. So far as the request 
of the Assembly envisages an opinion on humanitarian law, however, the 
obligations thereby imposed are (save for their own qualifying provisions) 
absolute. That is the bedrock of humanitarian law, and those 
engaged in conflict have always known that it is the price of Our hopes 
for the future that they must, whatever the provocation, fight with one 
hand behind their back and act in accordance with international law. 
While that factor diminishes relevance of context so far as the obligations 
of humanitarian law are concerned, it remains true, nonetheless, that  
context is important for other aspects of international law that the Court 
chooses to address. Yet the formulation of the question precludes con- 
sideration of that context. 
\n\n15. Addressing the reality that the question of the construction of the 
wall was only one aspect of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the Court 
States that it is indeed aware that the question of the wall is part of a 
greater whole, and it would take this circumstance carefully into account 
in any opinion it might give (para. 54). 
\n\n16. In fact, it never does so. There is nothing in the remainder of the 
Opinion that can be said to cover this point. Further, I find the history 
as recounted by the Court in paragraphs 71-76 neither balanced nor 
satisfactory. 
\n\n17. What should a court do when asked to deliver an opinion on one 
element in a larger problem? Clearly, it should not purport to answer 
these larger legal issues. The Court, wisely and correctly, avoids what we 
may term permanent status issues, as well as pronouncing on the rights 
and wrongs in myriad past controversies in the Israel-Palestine problem. 
What a court faced with this quandary must do is to provide a balanced 
opinion, made so by recalling the obligations incumbent upon all concerned. 
\n\n18. I regret that i do not think this has been achieved in the present 
Opinion. It is true that in paragraph 162 the Court recalls that illegal 
actions and unilateral decisions have been taken on all sides and that it 
emphasizes that both Israel and Palestine are under an obligation scrupulously 
to observe the rules of international humanitarian law. But in 
my view much, much more was required to avoid the huge imbalance 
that necessarily flows from being invited to look at only part of a greater 
whole, and then to take that circumstance carefully into account. The 
call upon both parties to act in accordance with international humanitarian 
law should have been placed within the dispositif. The failure to do 
so stands in marked contrast with the path that the Court chose to follow 
in operative clause F of the dispositif of the Legality of the Threat or Use 
of Nuclear Weapons, Advisory Opinion (I. C. J. Reports 1996 (I), p. 266). 
Further, the Court should have spelled out what is required of both par- 
ties in this greater whole. This is not difficult - from Security Council 
resolution 242 (1967) through to Security Council resolution 1515 (2003), 
the key underlying requirements have remained the same - that Israel is 
entitled to exist, to be recognized, and to security, and that the Palestinian 
people are entitled to their territory, to exercise self-determination, 
and to have their own State. Security Council resolution 1515 (2003) 
envisages that these long-standing obligations are to be secured, both 
generally and as to their detail, by negotiation. The perceptible tragedy is 
that neither side will act to achieve these ends prior to the other so doing. 
The Court, having decided that it was appropriate to exercise its jurisdiction, 
should have used the latitude available to it in an advisory opinion 
case, and reminded both parties not only of their substantive obligations

under international law, but also of the procedural obligation to move 
forward simultaneously. Further, i believe that, in order to achieve a 
balanced opinion, this latter element should also have appeared in the 
dispositif' itself. 
\n\n19. I think the Court should also have taken the opportunity to say, 
in the clearest terms, what regrettably today apparently needs constant 
reaffirmation even among international lawyers, namely, that the protection 
of civilians remains an intransgressible obligation of humanitarian 
law, not only for the occupier but equally for those seeking to liberate 
themselves from occupation. 
\n\n20. My vote in favour of subparagraph (2) of the dispositif has thus 
been made with considerable hesitation. i have voted affirmatively in the 
end because i agree with almost all of what the Court has written in para- 
graphs 44-64. My regrets are rather about what it has chosen not to 
write.
 
\n\n21. The way subparagraph (3) (A) of the dispositif is formulated does 
not separate out the various grounds that the Court relied on in reaching 
its conclusions. i have voted in favour of this subparagraph because i 
agree that the wall, being built in occupied territory, and its associated 
régime, entail certain violations of humanitarian law. But i do not agree 
with several of the other stepping stones used by the Court in reaching 
this generalized finding, nor with its handling of the source materials. 
\n\n22. The question put by the General Assembly asks the Court to 
respond by considering the rules and principles of international law, 
including the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, and relevant Security 
Council and General Assembly resolutions (General Assembly resolution ES-10114). 
It might have been anticipated that once the Court finds 
the Fourth Geneva Convention applicable humanitarian law would be at 
the heart of this Opinion. 
\n\n23. The General Assembly has in resolution ES-10113 determined that 
the wall contravenes humanitarian law, without specifying which pro- 
visions and why. Palestine has informed the Court that it regards 
Articles 33, 53, 55 and 64 of the Fourth Geneva Convention and Article 52 
of the Hague Regulations as violated. Other participants invoked 
Articles 23 (g), 46, 50 and 52 of the Hague Regulations, and Articles 27, 
47, 50, 55, 56 and 59 of the Fourth Convention. For the Special Rapporteur, 
the wall constitutes a violation of Articles 23 (g) and 46 of the 
Hague Regulations and Articles 47, 49, 50, 53 and 55 of the Fourth 
Geneva Convention. It might have been expected that an advisory opinion 
would have contained a detailed analysis, by reference to the texts, the
voluminous academic literature and the facts at the Court's disposal, as 
to which of these propositions is correct. Such an approach would have 
followed the tradition of using advisory opinions as an opportunity to 
elaborate and develop international law. 
\n\n24. It would also, as a matter of balance, have shown not only which 
provisions Israel has violated, but also which it has not. But the Court, 
once it has decided which of these provisions are in fact applicable, there- 
after refers only to those which Israel has violated. Further, the structure 
of the Opinion, in which humanitarian law and human rights law are 
not dealt with separately, makes it in my view extremely difficult to see 
what exactly has been decided by the Court. Notwithstanding the very 
general language of subparagraph (3) (A) of the dispositif, it should not 
escape attention that the Court has in the event found violations only 
of Article 49 of the Fourth Geneva Convention (para. 120), and of 
Articles 46 and 52 of the Hague Regulations and Article 53 of the 
Fourth Geneva Convention (para. 132). i agree with these findings. 
\n\n25. After its somewhat light treatment of international humanitarian 
law, the Court turns to human rights law. i agree with the Court's finding 
about the continued relevance of human rights law in the occupied territories. 
I also concur in the findings made at paragraph 134 as regards 
Article 12 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. 
\n\n26. At the same time, it has to be noted that there are established 
treaty bodies whose function it is to examine in detail the conduct of 
States parties to each of the Covenants. Indeed, the Court's response as 
regards the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights notes 
both the pertinent jurisprudence of the Human Rights Committee and 
also the concluding observations of the Committee on Israel's duties in 
the occupied territories. 
\n\n27. So far as the International Covenant on Economic, Social and 
Cultural Rights is concerned, the situation is even stranger, given the pro- 
grammatic requirements for the fulfilment of this category of rights. The 
Court has been able to do no more than observe, in a single phrase, that 
the wall and its associated régime 
impede the exercise by the persons concerned of the right to work, 
to health, to education and to an adequate standard of living as 
proclaimed in the International Covenant on Economic, Social and 
Cultural Rights ... (para. 134). 
For both Covenants, one may wonder about the appropriateness of asking 
for advisory opinions from the Court on compliance by States parties 
with such obligations, which are monitored, in much greater detail, by a 
treaty body established for that purpose. It could hardly be an answer 
that the General Assembly is not setting any more general precedent, 
because while many, many States are not in compliance with their obligations 
under the two Covenants, the Court is being asked to look only 
at the conduct of Israel in this regard.

\n\n28. The Court has also relied, for the general determination in sub- 
paragraph (3) (A) of the dispositif; on a finding that Israel is in violation 
of the law on self-determination. It follows observations on the legally 
problematic route of the wall and associated demographic risks with the 
statement: That construction, along with measures taken previously, 
thus severely impedes the exercise by the Palestinian people of its right to 
self-determination, and is therefore a breach of Israel's obligation to 
respect that right. (Para. 122.) This appears to me to be a non sequitur. 
\n\n29. There is a substantial body of doctrine and practice on self-determination 
beyond colonialism. The United Nations Declaration on 
Friendly Relations, 1970 (General Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV)) 
speaks also of self-determination being applicable in circumstances where 
peoples are subject to alien subjugation, domination, and exploitation. 
The General Assembly has passed many resolutions referring to the latter 
circumstance, having Afghanistan and the Occupied Arab Territories in 
mind (for example, General Assembly resolution 3236 (XXIX) of 1974 
(Palestine); General Assembly resolution 2144 (XXV) of 1987 (Afghani- 
stan)). The Committee on Human Rights has consistently supported this 
post-colonial view of self-determination. 
\n\n30. The Court has for the very first time, without any particular legal 
analysis, implicitly also adopted this second perspective. i approve of the 
principle invoked, but am puzzled as to its application in the present case. 
Self-determination is the right of All peoples ... freely [to] determine 
their political status and freely pursue their economic, social and cultural 
development (Art. 1 (l), International Covenant on Civil and Political 
Rights and also International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights). 
As this Opinion observes (para. 118), it is now accepted 
that the Palestinian people are a peoples for purposes of self-determination. 
But it seems to me quite detached from reality for the Court to 
find that it is the wall that presents a serious impediment to the exercise 
of this right. The real impediment is the apparent inability and / or unwillingness 
of both Israel and Palestine to move in parallel to secure the 
necessary conditions - that is, at one and the same time, for Israel 
to withdraw from Arab occupied territory and for Palestine to provide 
the conditions to allow Israel to feel secure in so doing. The simple point 
is underscored by the fact that if the wall had never been built, the 
Palestinians would still not yet have exercised their right to self-determination. 
It seems to me both unrealistic and unbalanced for the Court to 
find that the wall (rather than the larger problem, which is beyond the 
question put to the Court for an opinion) is a serious obstacle to self- 
determination. 
\n\n31. Nor is this finding any more persuasive when looked at from a 
territorial perspective. As the Court states in paragraph 121, the wall 
does not at the present lime constitute, per. se, a de facto annexation.
\n\nPeoples necessarily exercise their right to self-determination within their 
own territory. Whatever may be the detail of any finally negotiated 
boundary, there can be no doubt, as is said in paragraph 78 of the Opinion, 
that Israel is in occupation of Palestinian territory. That territory is 
no more, or less, under occupation because a wall has been built that 
runs through it. And to bring to an end that circumstance, it is necessary 
that both sides, simultaneously, accept their responsibilities under inter- 
national law. 
\n\n32. After the Court deals with the applicable law, and then applies it, 
it looks at possible qualifications, exceptions and defences to potential 
violations. 
\n\n33. I do not agree with all that the Court has to say on the question of 
the law of self-defence. In paragraph 139 the Court quotes Article 51 of 
the Charter and then continues Article 51 of the Charter thus recognizes 
the existence of an inherent right of self-defence in the case of armed 
attack by one State against another State. There is, with respect, nothing 
in the text of Article 51 that thus stipulates that self-defence is avail- 
able only when an armed attack is made by a State. That qualification is 
rather a result of the Court so determining in Military and Paramilitary 
Activities in und against Nicaragua (Nicaragua v. United States of 
America) (Merits, Judgment, I. C.J. Reports 1986, p. 14). It there held 
that military action by irregulars could constitute an armed attack if 
these were sent by or on behalf of the State and if the activity because of 
its scale and effects, would have been classified as an armed attack ... 
had it been carried out by regular armed forces (ibid., p. 103, para. 195). 
While accepting, as i must, that this is to be regarded as a statement of 
the law as it now stands, i maintain all the reservations as to this proposition 
that I have expressed elsewhere (R. Higgins, Problems and Process: 
International Law and How We Use It, pp. 250-251). 
\n\n34. i also find unpersuasive the Court's contention that, as the uses of 
force emanate from occupied territory, it is not an armed attack by one 
State against another. i fail to understand the Court's view that an 
occupying Power loses the right to defend its own civilian citizens at 
home if the attacks emanate from the occupied territory - 
a territory which it has found not to have been annexed and is certainly other 
than Israel. Further, Palestine cannot be sufficiently an international 
entity to be invited to these proceedings, and to benefit from humanitarian law, 
but not sufficiently an international entity for the prohibition 
of armed attack on others to be applicable. This is formalism of an un- 
evenhanded sort. The question is surely where responsibility lies for the 
sending of groups and persons who act against Israeli civilians and the 
cumulative severity of such action. 
\n\n35. In the event, however, these reservations have not caused me to 
vote against subparagraph (3) (A) of the dispositif, for two reasons. First, 
I remain unconvinced that non-forcible measures (such as the building of 
a wall) fall within self-defence under Article 51 of the Charter as that 
provision is normally understood. Second, even if it were an act of self- 
defence, properly so called, it would need to be justified as necessary and 
proportionate. While the wall does seem to have resulted in a diminution 
on attacks on Israeli civilians, the necessity and proportionality for the 
particular route selected, with its attendant hardships for Palestinians 
uninvolved in these attacks, has not been explained.




3d *******************


\n\nSEPARATE OPINION OF JUDGE HIGGINS 
\n\n36. The latter part of the dispositif deals with the legal consequences of 
the findings made by the Court. 
\n\n37. I have voted in favour of subparagraph (3) (D) of the dispositif 
but, unlike the Court, i do not think that the specified consequence of the 
identified violations of international law have anything to do with the 
concept of ergu omnes (cf. paras. 154-159 of this Opinion). The Court's 
celebrated dictum in Barcelona Traction, Light and Power Company, 
Limited, Second Phase (Judgment, I. C.J. Reports 1970, p. 32, para. 33) is 
frequently invoked for more than it can bear. Regrettably, this is now 
done also in this Opinion, at paragraph 155. That dictum was directed to 
a very specific issue of jurisdictional locus standi. As the International 
Law Commission has correctly put it in the Commentaries to the draft 
Articles on the Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts 
(Al56110 at p. 278), there are certain rights in which, by reason of their 
importance all states have a legal interest in their protection. It has 
nothing to do with imposing substantive obligations on third parties to a 
case. 
\n\n38. That an illegal situation is not to be recognized or assisted by third 
parties is self-evident, requiring no invocation of the uncertain concept of 
ergu onznes. It follows from a finding of an unlawful situation by the 
Security Council, in accordance with Articles 24 and 25 of the Charter 
entails decisions [that] are consequently binding on all States Members 
of the United Nations, which are thus under obligation to accept and 
carry them out (Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of 
South Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding 
Security Council Resolution 276 (19701, Advisory Opinion, I. C. J. Reports 
1971, p. 53, para. 115). The obligation upon United Nations Members 
not to recognize South Africa's illegal presence in Namibia, and not to 
lend support or assistance, relied in no way whatever on erga omnes. 
Rather, the Court emphasized that A binding determination made by a 
competent organ of the United Nations to the effect that a situation is 
illegal cannot remain without consequence. (Ibid, para. 117.) The Court 
had already found in a contentious case that its determination of an 
illegal act entails a legal consequence, namely that of putting an end to 
an illegal situation (Haya de la Torre, Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 1951, 
p. 82). Although in the present case it is the Court, rather than a United 
Nations organ acting under Articles 24 and 25, that has found the 
illegality; and although it is found in the context of an advisory opinion 
rather than in a contentious case, the Court's position as the principal 
judicial organ of the United Nations suggests that the legal consequence 
for a finding that an act or situation is illegal is the same. The obligation 
upon United Nations Members of non-recognition and non-assistance 
does not rest on the notion of erga omnes. 

\n\n39. Finally, the invocation (para. 157) of the erga omnes nature of 
violations of humanitarian law seems equally irrelevant. These intransgressible 
principles are generally binding because they are customary 
international law, no more and no less. And the first Article to the 
Fourth Geneva Convention, under which The High Contracting Parties 
undertake to respect and to ensure respect for the present Convention in 
all circumstances while apparently viewed by the Court as something to 
do with the erga ommes principle, is simply a provision in an almost 
universally ratified multilateral Convention. The Final Record of the diplomatic 
conference of Geneva of 1949 offers no useful explanation of that 
provision; the commentary thereto interprets the phrase ensure respect 
as going beyond legislative and other action within a State's own territory. 
It observes that in the event of a Power failing to fulfil its 
obligations, the other Contracting Parties (neutral, allied or enemy) 
may, and should, endeavour to bring it back to an attitude of respect 
for the Convention. The proper working of the system of protection provided by 
the Convention demands in fact that the Contracting Parties should 
not be content merely to apply its provisions themselves, but should 
do everything in their power to ensure that the humanitarian principles 
underlying the Conventions are applied universally. (The 
Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949: Commentary, IV Geneva 
Convention relative to the protection of civilian persons in time of war, Pictet, ed., p. 16.)
 
\n\nIt will be noted that the Court has, in subparagraph (3) (D) of the dis- 
positif; carefully indicated that any such action should be in conformity 
with the Charter and international law. 
\n\n40. In conclusion, i would add that, although there has indeed been 
much information provided to the Court in this case, that provided 
directly by Israel has only been very partial. The Court has based itself 
largely on the Secretary-General's report from 14 April2002 to 20 November 
2003 and on the later Written Statement of the United Nations (see 
para. 79). It is not clear whether it has availed itself of other data in the 
public domain. Useful information is in fact contained in such documents 
as the Third Report of the current Special Rapporteur and Israel's Reply 
thereto (E/CN.4/2004/6/Add.1), as well as in The Impact of Israel's 
Separation Barrier on Affected West Bank Communities: An Update to 
the Humanitarian and Emergency Policy Group (HEPG), Construction
of the Barrier, Access, and Its Humanitarian Impact, March 2004. In 
any event, the Court's findings of law are notably general in character, 
saying remarkably little as concerns the application of specific provisions 
of the Hague Rules or the Fourth Geneva Convention along particular 
sections of the route of the wall. i have nonetheless voted in favour of 
subparagraph (3) (A) of the dispositif because there is undoubtedly a significant 
negative impact upon portions of the population of the West 
Bank that cannot be excused on the grounds of military necessity allowed 
by those Conventions; and nor has Israel explained to the United Nations 
or to this Court why its legitimate security needs can be met only by the 
route selected. 

