\n\nSEPARATE OPINION OF JUDGE KOOIJMANS 
\n\n1. I have voted in favour of all paragraphs of the operative part of the 
Advisory Opinion with one exception, viz. subparagraph (3) (D) dealing 
with the legal consequences for States. 
I had a number of reasons for casting that negative vote which i will 
only briefly indicate at this stage, since i will come back to them when 
commenting on the various parts of the Opinion. 
My motives can be summarized as follows. 
\n\nFirst, the request as formulated by the General Assembly did not make 
it necessary for the Court to determine the obligations for States which 
ensue from the Court's findings. In this respect an analogy with the structure 
of the Opinion in the Namibia case is not appropriate. In that case 
the question about the legal consequences for States was at the heart of 
the request and logically so since it was premised on a decision of the 
Security Council. That resolution, and in particular its operative para- 
graph 5 which was addressed to all States, was considered by the Court 
to be essential for the purposes of the present advisory opinion (Legal 
Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of South Africa in 
Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding Security Council Resolution 
276 (1970), Advisory Opinion, I. C. J. Reports 1971, p. 51, para. 108). 
A similar situation does not exist in the present case, where the Court's 
view is not asked on the legal consequences of a decision taken by a 
political organ of the United Nations but of an act committed by a Member
State. That does not prevent the Court from considering the issue of 
consequences for third States once that act has been found to be illegal 
but then the Court's conclusion is wholly dependent upon its reasoning 
and not upon the necessary logic of the request.

\n\nIt is, however, this reasoning that in my view is not persuasive (see 
paras. 39-49, below) and this was my second motive for casting a negative vote. 
And, third, I find the Court's conclusions as laid down in sub- 
paragraph (3) (D) of the dispositif rather weak; apart from the Court's 
finding that States are under an obligation not to render aid or 
assistance in maintaining the situation created by [the] construction 
[of the wall] (a finding I subscribe to) I find it difficult to envisage 
what States are expected to do or not to do in actual practice. In my 
opinion a judicial body's findings should have a direct bearing on the 
addressee's behaviour; neither the first nor the last part of operative 
subparagraph (3) (D) meets this requirement. 

\n\n2. Although I am in general agreement with the Court's Opinion, on 
some issues i have reservations with regard to its reasoning. I will, in 
giving my comments, follow the logical order of the Opinion: 
(a) jurisdictional issues; 
(b) the question of judicial propriety; 
(c) the merits; 
(d) the legal consequences. 
Before doing so  wish, however, to make some remarks about the 
background and context of the request. 

\n\n3. In paragraph 54 of the Opinion the Court observes (in the context 
of judicial propriety) that it is aware that the question of the wall is part 
of a greater whole but that that cannot be a reason for it to decline to 
reply to the question asked. It adds that this wider context will be care- 
fully taken into account.  fully share the Court's view as laid down in 
that paragraph including the Court's observation that it can nevertheless 
only examine other issues to the extent that is necessary for the con- 
sideration of the question put to it. 
4. In my opinion the Court could and should have given more explicit 
attention to the general context of the request in its Opinion. The situation 
in and around Palestine has been for a number of decades not only 
a virtually continuous threat to international peace and security but also 
a human tragedy which in many respects is mind-boggling. How can a 
society like the Palestinian one get used to and live with a situation where 
the victims of violence are often innocent men, women and children'? 
How can a society like the Israeli society get used to and live with a 
situation where attacks against a political opponent are targeted at innocent 
civilians, men, women and children, in an indiscriminate way? 

\n\n5. The construction of the wall is explained by Israel as a necessary 
protection against the latter category of acts which are generally 
considered to be international crimes. Deliberate and indiscriminate attacks 
against civilians with the intention to kill are the core element of terror- 
ism which has been unconditionally condemned by the international 
community regardless of the motives which have inspired them. 
Every State, including Israel, has the right and even the duty (as the 
Court says in paragraph 141) to respond to such acts in order to protect 
the life of its citizens, albeit the choice of means in doing so is limited by 
the norms and rules of international law. In the present case, Israel has 
not respected those limits, and the Court convincingly demonstrates that 
these norms and rules of international law have not been respected by it. 
i find no fault with this conclusion nor with the finding that the 
construction of the wall along the chosen route has greatly added to the suffering 
of the Palestinians living in the Occupied Territory. 

\n\n6. In paragraph 122 the Court finds that the construction of the wall, 
along with measures taken earlier, severely impedes the exercise by the 
Palestinian people of its right to self-determination, and therefore 
constitutes a breach of Israel's obligation to respect that right. i have doubts 
whether the last part of that finding is correct (see paragraph 32, below), 
but it is beyond doubt that the mere existence of a structure that sepa- 
rates the Palestinians from each other makes the realization of their right 
to self-determination far more difficult. even if it has to be admitted that 
the realization of this right is more dependent upon political agreement 
than on the situation in loco. 
But it is also true that the terrorist acts themselves have caused great 
harm to the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people for a better 
future, as was stated in the Middle East Quartet Statement of 16 July 
2002. And the Statement continues: Terrorists must not be allowed to 
kill the hope of an entire region, and a united international community, 
for genuine peace and security for both Palestinians and Israelis. 
(Written Statement of Israel, Annex 10.) 

\n\n7. The fact that the Court has limited itself to report merely on a 
number of the historical facts which have led to the present human 
tragedy may be correct from the viewpoint of what is really needed to 
answer the request of the General Assembly: the result, however, is that 
the historical résumé, as presented in paragraphs 70 to 78, is rather two- 
dimensional. i will illustrate this by giving one example which is hardly 
relevant for the case itself. 

\n\n8. Before giving its historical résumé, the Court says that it will first 
make a brief analysis of the status of the territory and it starts by 
mentioning the establishment of the Mandate after the First World War. 
Nothing is said, however, about the status of the West Bank between the 
conclusion of the General Armistice Agreement in 1949 and the occupation 
by Israel in 1967, in spite of the fact that it is a generally known fact
that it was placed by Jordan under its sovereignty but that this claim 
to sovereignty, which was relinquished only in 1988, was recognized by 
three States only. 

\n\n9. i fail to understand the reason for this omission of an objective 
historical fact since in my view the fact that Jordan claimed sovereignty 
over the West Bank only strengthens the argument in favour of the 
applicability of the Fourth Geneva Convention right from the moment 
of its occupation by Israel in June 1967. 
If it is correct that the Government of Israel claims that the Fourth 
Geneva Convention is not applicable de jure in the West Bank since that 
territory had not previously to the 1967 war been under Jordanian 
sovereignty, that argument already fails since a territory, which by one of the 
parties to an armed conflict is claimed as its own and is under its control, 
is - once occupied by the other party - by definition occupied territory 
of a High Contracting Party in the sense of the Fourth Geneva Convention 
(emphasis added). And both Israel and Jordan were parties to the 
Convention. 
\n\nThat this at the time also was recognized by the Israeli authorities is 
borne out by the Order issued after the occupation and referred to in 
paragraph 93 of the Opinion. 

\n\n10. The strange result of the Court's reticence about the status of the 
West Bank between 1949 and 1967 is that it is only by implication that 
the reader is able to understand that it was under Jordanian control 
(paragraphs 73 and 129 refer to the demarcation line between Israel and 
Jordan (the Green Line)) without ever being explicitly informed that the 
West Bank had been placed under Jordanian authority. This is all the 
more puzzling as the Court would in no way have been compelled to 
comment on the legality or legitimacy of that authority if it had made 
mention of it. 

\n\n11. In a letter of 29 January from the Deputy Director General and 
Legal Adviser of the Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the Registrar 
of the Court it is stated that Israel trusts and expects that the Court will 
look beyond the request to the wider issues relevant to this matter 
(Written Statement of Israel, covering letter). In this respect it was said 
that resolution ES-10114 is absolutely silent on the terrorist attacks 
against Israeli citizens and thus reflects the gravest prejudice and imbalance 
with the requesting organ. Israel, therefore, requested the Court 
not to render the opinion. 

\n\n12. i am of the view that the Court, in deciding whether it is appropriate 
to respond to a request for an advisory opinion, can involve itself 
with the political debate which has preceded the request only to the 
extent necessary to understand the question put. It is no exception that 
such debate is heated but, as the Court said in the case of the Legality of 
the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons.once the Assembly has asked, by adopting a resolution, for an advisory 
opinion on a legal question, the Court, in determining whether 
there are any compelling reasons for it to refuse to give such an 
opinion, will not have regard to the origins or to the political history 
of the request, or to the distribution of votes in respect of the 
adopted resolution (I. C.J. Reports 1996 (I), p. 237, para. 16). 
The Court, however, does not function in a void. It is the principal judicial 
organ of the United Nations and has to carry out its function and 
responsibility within the wider political context. It cannot be expected to 
present a legal opinion on the request of a political organ without taking 
full account of the context in which the request was made. 

\n\n13. Although the Court certainly has taken into account the arguments 
put forward by Israel and has dealt with them in a considerate 
manner, i am of the view that the present Opinion could have reflected in 
a more satisfactory way the interests at stake for all those living in the 
region. The rather oblique references to terrorist acts which can be Sound 
at several places in the Opinion are in my view not sufficient for this purpose. 
An advisory opinion is brought to the attention of a political organ 
of the United Nations and is destined to have an effect on a political 
process. It should therefore throughout its reasoning and up till the 
operative part reflect the legitimate interests and responsibilities of all 
those involved and not merely refer to them in a concluding paragraph 
(para. 162). 
 
\n\n14. i fully share the view of the Court that the adoption of resolution 
ES-10114 was not ultra vires since it did not contravene the provision 
of Article 12, paragraph 1, of the Charter; nor did it fail to fulfil the 
essential conditions set by the Uniting for Peace resolution (resolution 
377 A (V)) for the convening of an Emergency Special Session. 

\n\n15. i doubt, however, whether it is possible to describe the practice of 
the political organs of the United Nations with respect to the interpretation 
of Article 12, paragraph 1, of the Charter without taking into 
account the effect of the Uniting for Peace resolution on this interpretation. 
In the Opinion, the Court deals with resolution 377 A (V) as a sepa- 
rate item and merely in relation to its procedural requirements. In my 
opinion this resolution also had a more substantive effect, namely with 
regard to the interpretation of the relationship between the competences 
of the Security Council and the General Assembly respectively, in the 
field of international peace and security and has certainly expedited  
the development of the interpretation of the condition, contained in 
Article 12, paragraph 1, namely that the Assembly shall not make a 
recommendation with regard to a dispute or situation while the Security 
Council is exercising its functions in respect of such dispute or situation 
(emphasis added). 

\n\n16. This effect is also recognized in doctrine. The adoption of the 
'Uniting for Peace' resolution ... could not fail to have an effect on the 
weight to be given to the restriction in Article 12, paragraph 1. (Philippe 
Manin, in J.-P. Cot, La Charte des Nations Unies, 2nd ed., 1981, p. 298 
[translation by the Registry]; see also E. de Wet, The Chapter VII 
Powers of' the United Nations Security Council, 2004, p. 46.) In actual 
practice the adoption of the Uniting for Peace resolution has contributed 
to the interpretation that, if a veto cast by a permanent member prevents 
the Security Council from taking a decision, the latter is no longer considered 
to be exercising its functions within the meaning of Article 12, 
paragraph 1. And the fact that a veto had been cast when the Security 
Council voted on a resolution dealing with the construction of the wall is 
determinative for the conclusion that the Security Council was no longer 
exercising its functions under the Charter with respect to the construction 
of the wall. In the present case, therefore, the conclusion that resolution 
ES-10114 did not contravene Article 12, paragraph 1, of the Charter 
cannot be dissociated from the effect resolution 377 A (V) has had on the 
interpretation of that provision. 

\n\n17. That such practice is accepted by both Assembly and Security Council 
also with regard to the procedural requirements of resolution 377 A (V) 
is borne out by the fact that none of the Council's members considered 
that the reconvening of the Assembly in Emergency Special Session 
on 20 October 2003 was unconstitutional and that the adoption of 
the resolution demanding that Israel stop and reverse the construction 
of the wall was therefore ultra vires. In this respect it is telling that this 
resolution (resolution ES-10113) was tabled as a compromise by the 
Presidency of the European Union, among whose members were two 
permanent and two non-permanent members of the Security Council, 
less than a week after a draft resolution on the same subject had been 
vetoed in the Council. 

\n\n18. Let me add that i agree with the Court that there has developed a 
practice enabling the General Assembly and the Security Council to deal 
in parallel with the same matter concerning the maintenance of international 
peace and security. I doubt, however, whether a resolution of the 
character of resolution ES-10113 (which beyond any doubt is a recommendation 
in the sense of Article 12, paragraph 1) could have been law- 
fully adopted by the Assembly, whether in a regular session or in an 
Emergency Special Session, if the Security Council had been considering 
the specific issue of the construction of the wall without yet having taken 
a decision.

 
\n\n19. I must confess that i have felt considerable hesitation as to whether 
it would be judicially proper to comply with the request of the Assembly. 

\n\n20. This hesitation had first of all to do with the question whether the 
Court would not be unduly politicized by giving the requested advisory 
opinion, thereby undermining its ability to contribute to global security 
and to respect for the rule of law. It must be admitted that such an 
opinion, whatever its content, will inevitably become part of an already 
heated political debate. The question is in particular pertinent as three 
members of the Quartet (the United States, the Russian Federation and 
the European Union) abstained on resolution ES-10114 and do not seem 
too eager to see the Court complying with the request out of fear that the 
opinion may interfere with the political peace process. Such fears cannot 
be taken lightly since the situation concerned is a continuous danger for 
international peace and security and a source of immense human suffering. 

\n\n21. While recognizing that the risk of a possible politicization is real, 
I nevertheless concluded that this risk would not be neutralized by a 
refusal to give an opinion. The risk should have been a consideration for 
the General Assembly when it envisaged making the request. Once the 
decision to do so had been taken, the Court was made an actor on the 
political stage regardless of whether it would or would not give an 
opinion. A refusal would just as much have politicized the Court as the 
rendering of an opinion. Only by limiting itself strictly to its judicial 
function is the Court able to minimize the risk that its credibility in upholding 
the respect for the rule of law is affected. 

\n\n22. My hesitation was also related to the question of the object of the 
Assembly's request. What was the Assembly's purpose in making the 
request? Resolution ES-10114 seems to give some further information in 
this respect in its last preambular paragraph which reads as follows: 
Bearing in mind that the passage of time further compounds the 
difficulties on the ground, as Israel, the occupying Power, continues 
to refuse to comply with international law vis-à-vis its construction 
of the above-mentioned wall, with all its detrimental implications 
and consequences ... Evidently the Assembly finds it necessary to take speedy action to bring 
to an end these detrimental implications and consequences and for this 
purpose it needs the views of the Court. 
But the question remains: Views on what? And why the views of a judicial 
body on an act which has already been determined not to be in conformity 
with international law and the perpetrator of which has already 
been called upon to terminate and reverse its wrongful conduct 
(resolution ES-10/13)? 

\n\n23. The present request recalls the dilemma as seen by Judge Petrén in 
the Namibia case. He felt that the purpose of the request for an advisory 
opinion was in that case above all to obtain from the Court a reply such 
that States would find themselves under obligation to bring to bear on 
South Africa pressure ... He called this a reversal of the natural distribution 
of roles as between the principal judicial organ and the political 
organ of the United Nations since, instead of asking the Court its opinion 
on a legal question in order to deduce the political consequences following 
from it, the opposite was done (Legal Consequences for States of 
the Continued Presence of South Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) 
notwithstanding Security Council Resolution 276 /1970), Advisory 
Opinion, I. C. J. Reports 1971, p. 128). 

\n\n24. In the present Opinion the Court responds to the argument that 
the Assembly has not made clear what use it would make of an advisory 
opinion on the wall, with a reference to the Nuclear Weapons case where 
it said that 
it is not for the Court itself to purport to decide whether or not an 
advisory opinion is needed by the Assembly for the performance of its 
functions. The General Assembly has the right to decide for itself on 
the usefulness of an opinion in the light of its own needs. (Para. 61.) 
And the Court continues that it cannot substitute its assessment of the 
usefulness of the opinion requested for that of the organ that seeks such 
opinion, namely the General Assembly (para. 62). 

\n\n25. I do not consider this answer fully satisfactory. There is quite a 
difference between substituting the Court's assessment of the usefulness of the 
opinion for that of the organ requesting it and analysing from a judicial 
viewpoint what the purpose of the request is. The latter is a simple necessity 
in order to find out what the Court as a judicial body is in a position 
to say. And from that point of view the request is phrased in a way which 
can be called odd, to put it mildly. And in actual fact the Court makes this 
analysis when in paragraph 39 of the Opinion it says that the use of the 
terms legal consequences arising from the construction of the wall 
necessarily encompasses an assessment of whether that construction is or 
is not in breach of certain rules and principles of international law. I agree 
with that statement but not because the word necessarily is related to the 
terms of the request but because it is related to the judicial responsibility of 
the Court. To quote the words of Judge Dillard in the Namibia case: 
when these [political] organs do see fit to ask for an advisory opinion, 
they must expect the Court to act in strict accordance with its 
judicial function. This function precludes it from accepting, without 
any enquiry whatever, a legal conclusion which itself conditions the 
nature and scope of the legal consequences flowing from it. It would 
be otherwise if the resolutions requesting an opinion were legally 
neutral ... (I. C. J. Reports 1971, p. 15 1; emphasis added.)

\n\n26. In the present case the request is far from being legally neutral. 
In order not to be precluded, from the viewpoint of judicial propriety, 
from rendering the opinion, the Court therefore is duty bound to recon- 
sider the content of the request in order to uphold its judicial dignity. The 
Court has done so but in my view it should have done so proprio motu 
and not by assuming what the Assembly necessarily must have assumed, 
something it evidently did not. 

\n\n27. Let me add that in other respects i share the views the Court has 
expressed with regard to the issue of judicial propriety. In particular the 
Court's finding that the subject-matter of the General Assembly cannot be 
regarded as being only a bilateral matter between Israel and Palestine 
(para. 49) is in my view worded in a felicitous way since, in regard 
to the issue of the existence of a bilateral dispute, it avoids the dilemma 
of either / or. A situation which is of legitimate concern to the organized 
international community and a bilateral dispute with regard to that same 
situation may exist simultaneously. The existence of the latter cannot 
deprive the organs of the organized community of the competence which 
has been assigned to them by the constitutive instruments. In the present 
case the involvement of the United Nations in the question of Palestine is 
a long-standing one and, as the Court says, the subject-matter of the 
request is of acute concern to the United Nations (para. 50). By giving an 
opinion the Court therefore in no way circumvents the principle of con- 
sent to the judicial settlement of a bilateral dispute which exists 
simultaneously. The bilateral dispute cannot be dissociated from the subject- 
matter of the request, but only in very particular circumstances which 
cannot be spelled out in general can its existence be seen as an argument 
for the Court to decline to reply to the request. In this respect, 1 find the 
quotation from the Western Sahara Opinion in paragraph 47 of the 
Opinion, which contains pure circular reasoning, less than helpful. 

\n\n28. If the request has been legitimately made in view of the United 
Nations long-standing involvement with the question of Palestine, 
Israel's argument that the Court does not have at its disposal the 
necessary evidentiary material, as this is to an important degree in the hands of 
Israel as a party to the dispute, does not hold water. The Court has to 
respect Israel's choice not to address the merits, but it is the Court's own 
responsibility to assess whether the available information is sufficient to 
enable it to give the requested opinion. And, although it is a matter for 
sincere regret that Israel has decided not to address the merits, the Court 
is right when it concludes that the available material allows it to give the 
opinion. 

\n\n29. I share the Court's view that the 1907 Hague Regulations, the 
Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, the 1966 Covenants on Civil and 
Political Rights and on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the 
1989 Convention on the Rights of the Child are applicable to the 
Occupied Palestinian Territory and that Israel by constructing the wall and 
establishing the associated régime has breached its obligation under 
certain provisions of each of these conventions. 
i find no fault with the Court's reasoning in this respect although i 
regret that the summary of the Court's findings in paragraph 137 does 
not contain a list of treaty provisions which have been breached. 

\n\n30. The Court has refrained from taking a position with regard to 
territorial rights and the question of permanent status. It has taken note of 
statements, made by Israeli authorities on various occasions, that the 
fence is a temporary measure, that it is not a border and that it does 
not change the legal status of the territory. i wellcome these assurances 
which may be seen as the recognition of legal commitments on the side of 
Israel but share the Court's concern that the construction of the wall 
creates a fait accompli. It is therefore all the more important to expedite 
the political process which has to settle all territorial and permanent 
status issues. 

\n\n31. Self-determination - In my view, it would have been better if the 
Court had also left issues of self-determination to this political process. 
i fully recognize that the right of self-determination is one of the basic 
principles of modern international law and that the realization of this 
right for the people of Palestine is one of the most burning issues for 
the solution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The overriding aim of the 
political process, as it is embodied inter alia in the Roadmap, is the 
emergence of an independent, democratic and viable Palestinian State 
living side by side in peace and security with Israel and its other neigh- 
bours (dossier of the Secretary-General, No. 70). This goal is subscribed 
to by both Israel and Palestine; both are, therefore, in good faith bound 
to desist from acts which may jeopardize this common interest. 

\n\n32. The right of self-determination of the Palestinian people is there- 
fore imbedded in a much wider context than the construction of the wall 
and has to find its realization in this wider context. I readily agree with 
the Court that the wall and its associated régime impede the exercise by 
the Palestinian people of its right to self-determination be it only for the 
reason that the wall establishes a physical separation of the people 
entitled to enjoy this right. But not every impediment to the exercise of a 
right is by definition a breach of that right or of the obligation to respect 
it, as the Court seems to conclude in paragraph 122. As was said by the 
Quartet in its statement of 16 July 2002, the terrorist attacks (and the 
failure of the Palestinian Authority to prevent them) cause also great 
harm to the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people and thus 
seriously impede the realization of the right of self-determination. is 
that also a breach of that right? And if so, by whom? In my view the 
Court could not have concluded that Israel had committed a breach of 
its obligation to respect the Palestinians' right to self-determination 
without further legal analysis. 

\n\n33. In this respect i do not find the references to earlier statements of 
the Court in paragraph 88 of the Opinion very enlightening. In the 
Namibia case the Court referred in specific terms to the relations between 
the inhabitants of a mandate and the mandatory as reflected in the 
constitutive instruments of the mandate system. In the East Timor case the 
Court called the rights of peoples to self-determination in a colonial 
situation a right ergu omnes, therefore a right opposable to all. But it said 
nothing about the way in which this right must be translated into 
obligations for States which are not the colonial Power. And I repeat the 
question: is every impediment to the exercise of the right to self-determination 
a breach of an obligation to respect it? Is it so only when it is 
serious? Would the discontinuance of the impeding act restore the right or 
merely bring the breach to an end? 

\n\n34. Proportionality - The Court finds that the conditions set out in 
the qualifying clauses in the applicable humanitarian law and human 
rights conventions have not been met and that the measures taken by 
Israel cannot be justified by military exigencies or by requirements of 
national security or public order (paras. 135-137). I agree with that 
finding but in my opinion the construction of the wall should also have been 
put to the proportionality test, in particular since the concepts of military 
necessity and proportionality have always been intimately linked in 
international humanitarian law. And in my view it is of decisive importance 
that, even if the construction of the wall and its associated régime could 
be justified as measures necessary to protect the legitimate rights of 
Israeli citizens, these measures would not pass the proportionality test. 
The route chosen for the construction of the wall and the ensuing 
disturbing consequences for the inhabitants of the Occupied Palestinian 
Territory are manifestly disproportionate to interests which Israel seeks to 
protect, as seems to be recognized also in recent decisions of the Israeli 
Supreme Court. 

\n\n35. Self - defence - Israel based the construction of the wall on its 
inherent right of self-defence as contained in Article 51 of the Charter. In 
this respect it relied on Security Council resolutions 1368 (2001) and 1373 
(2001), adopted after the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001 against 
targets located in the United States. 
The Court starts its response to this argument by stating that Article 51 
recognizes the existence of an inherent right of self-defence in 
the case of an armed attack by one State against another State (para. 139). 
Although this statement is undoubtedly correct, as a reply to Israel's 
argument it is, with all due respect, beside the point. Resolutions 1368 
(2001) and 1373 (2001) recognize the inherent right of individual or 
collective self-defence without making any reference to an armed attack by a 
State. The Security Council called acts of international terrorism, without 
any further qualification, a threat to international peace and security 
which authorizes it to act under Chapter VII of the Charter. And it 
actually did so in resolution 1373 (2001) without ascribing these 
acts of terrorism to a particular State. This is the completely new element in these 
resolutions. This new element is not excluded by the terms of Article 51 
since this conditions the exercise of the inherent right of self-defence on a 
previous armed attack without saying that this armed attack must come 
from another State even if this has been the generally accepted 
interpretation for more than 50 years. The Court has regrettably by-passed this 
new element, the legal implications of which cannot as yet be assessed but 
which marks undeniably a new approach to the concept of self-defence. 

\n\n36. The argument which in my view is decisive for the dismissal of 
Israel's claim that it is merely exercising its right of self-defence can be 
found in the second part of paragraph 139. The right of self-defence as 
contained in the Charter is a rule of international law and thus relates to 
international phenomena. Resolutions 1368 (2001) and 1373 (2001) refer 
to acts of international terrorism as constituting a threat to international 
peace and security; they therefore have no immediate bearing on terrorist 
acts originating within a territory which is under control of the State 
which is also the victim of these acts. And Israel does not claim that these 
acts have their origin elsewhere. The Court therefore rightly concludes 
that the situation is different from that contemplated by resolutions 1368 
(2001) and 1373 (2001) and that consequently Article 51 of the Charter 
cannot be invoked by Israel. 

 
\n\n37. i have voted in favour of subparagraph (3) (B), (C) and (E) of the 
operative part. I agree with the Court's finding with regard to the 
consequences of the breaches by Israel of its obligations under international 
law for Israel itself and for the United Nations (paras. 149-153 and 160). 
Since i have voted, however, against operative subparagraph (3) (D), the 
remainder of my opinion will explain the reasons for my dissent in a 
more detailed way than i did in my introductory remarks. 

\n\n38. The General Assembly requests the Court to specify what are the 
legal consequences arising from the construction of the wall. If the object 
of the request is to obtain from the Court an opinion which the General 
Assembly deems of assistance to it for the proper exercise of its functions 
(para. 50) it is only logical that a specific paragraph of the dispositif is 
addressed to the General Assembly. That the paragraph is also addressed 
to the Security Council is logical as well in view of the shared or parallel 
responsibilities of the two organs. 
Since the Court has found that the construction of the wall and the 
associated régime constitute breaches of Israel's obligations under inter- 
national law, it is also logical that the Court spells out what are the legal 
consequences for Israel. 

\n\n39. Although the Court beyond any doubt is entitled to do so, the 
request itself does not necessitate (not even by implication) the 
determination of the legal consequences for other States, even if a great number 
of participants urged the Court to do so (para. 146). In this respect the 
situation is completely different from that in the Namibia case where the 
question was exclusively focused on the legal consequences for States, 
and logically so since the subject-matter of the request was a decision by 
the Security Council. 

\n\nIn the present case there must therefore be a special reason for deter- 
mining the legal consequences for other States since the clear analogy in 
wording with the request in the Namibia case is insufficient. 

\n\n40. That reason as indicated in paragraphs 155 to 158 of the Opinion 
is that the obligations violated by Israel include certain obligations erga 
omnes. I must admit that i have considerable difficulty in understanding 
why a violation of an obligation ergu omnes by one State should 
necessarily lead to an obligation for third States. The nearest i can come to 
such an explanation is the text of Article 41 of the International Law 
Commission's Articles on State Responsibility. That Article reads: 
1. States shall cooperate to bring to an end through lawful means 
any serious breach within the meaning of article 40. [Article 40 deals 
with serious breaches of obligations arising under a peremptory 
norm of general international law.] 
2. No State shall recognize as lawful a situation created by a 
serious breach within the meaning of article 40, nor render aid or 
assistance in maintaining that situation. 
Paragraph 3 of Article 41 is a saving clause and of no relevance for the 
present case. 
\n\n41. I will not deal with the tricky question whether obligations ergu 
omnes can be equated with obligations arising under a peremptory norm 
of general international law. In this respect i refer to the useful 
commentary of the ILC under the heading of Chapter III of its Articles. 
For argument's sake i start from the assumption that the consequences of the 
violation of such obligations are identical. 





******************


\n\nSEPARATE OPINION OF JUDGE KOOIJMANS 
\n\n42. Paragraph 1 of Article 41 explicitly refers to a duty to co-operate. 
As paragraph 3 of the commentary states, What is called for in the 
face of serious breaches is a joint and coordinated effort by all States to 
counteract the effects of these breaches. And paragraph 2 refers to 
cooperation ... in the framework of a competent international organization, 
in particular the United Nations. Article 41, paragraph 1, there- 
fore does not refer to individual obligations of third States as a result of 
a serious breach. What is said there is encompassed in the Court's finding 
in operative subparagraph (3) (E) and not in subparagraph (3) (D). 
43. Article 41, paragraph 2, however, explicitly mentions the duty not 
to recognize as lawful a situation created by a serious breach just as 
operative subparagraph (3) (D) does. In its commentary the ILC refers to 
unlawful situations which - virtually without exception - 
take the form of a legal claim, usually to territory. It gives as examples an attempted 
acquisition of sovereignty over territory through denial of the right of 
self-determination, the annexation of Manchuria by Japan and of 
Kuwait by Iraq, South Africa's claim to Namibia, the Unilateral 
Declaration of Independence in Rhodesia and the creation of Bantustans in 
South Africa. In other words, all examples mentioned refer to situations 
arising from formal or quasi-formal promulgations intended to have an 
erga omnes effect. I have no problem with accepting a duty of non- 
recognition in such cases. 

\n\n44. I have great difficulty, however, in understanding what the 
duty not to recognize an illegal fact involves. What are the individual 
addressees of this part of operative subparagraph (3) (D) supposed to do 
in order to comply with this obligation? That question is even more 
cogent considering that 144 States unequivocally have condemned the 
construction of the wall as unlawful (resolution ES-10/13), whereas those 
States which abstained or voted against (with the exception of Israel) 
did not do so because they considered the construction of the wall 
as legal. The duty not to recognize amounts, therefore, in my view to an 
obligation without real substance. 

\n\n45. That argument does not apply to the second obligation mentioned 
in Article 41, paragraph 2, namely the obligation not to render aid or 
assistance in maintaining the situation created by the serious breach. I 
therefore Sully support that part of operative subparagraph (3) (D). 
Moreover, i would have been in favour of adding in the reasoning or 
even in the operative part a sentence reminding States of the importance 
of rendering humanitarian assistance to the victims of the construction of 
the wall. (The Court included a similar sentence, be it with a different 
scope, in its Opinion in the Namibia case, I. C. J. Reports 1971, p. 56, 
para. 125.) 

\n\n46. Finally, i have difficulty in accepting the Court's finding that the 
States parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention are under an obligation 
to ensure compliance by Israel with humanitarian law as embodied in 
that Convention (paragraph 159, operative subparagraph (3) (D), last 
part).In this respect the Court bases itself on common Article 1 of the 
Geneva Convention which reads: The High Contracting Parties under- 
take to respect and to ensure respect for the present Convention in all 
circumstances. (Emphasis added.) 

\n\n47. The Court does not say on what ground it concludes that this 
Article imposes obligations on third States not party to a conflict. 
The travaux préparatoires do not support that conclusion. According to 
Professor Kalshoven, who investigated thoroughly the genesis and further 
development of common Article 1, it was mainly intended to ensure 
respect of the conventions by the population as a whole and as such was 
closely linked to common Article 3 dealing with internal conflicts 
(F. Kalshoven, The Undertaking to Respect and Ensure Respect in All 
Circumstances: From Tiny Seed to Ripening Fruit, in Yearbook of 
International Humanitarian Law, Vol. 2, 1999, pp. 3-61). His conclusion 
from the travaux préparatoires is: 
I have not found in the records of the Diplomatic Conference 
even the slightest awareness on the part of government delegates 
that one might ever wish to read into the phrase 'to ensure respect' 
any undertaking by a contracting State other than an obligation to 
ensure respect for the Conventions by its people 'in all circum- 
stances'. (Ibid., p. 28.) 

\n\n48. Now it is true that already from an early moment the International 
Committee of the Red Cross in its (non-authoritative) commentaries on 
the 1949 Convention has taken the position that common Article 1 
contains an obligation for all States parties to ensure respect by other States 
parties. It is equally true that the Diplomatic Conference which adopted 
the 1977 Additional Protocols incorporated common Article 1 in the 
First Protocol. But at no moment did the Conference deal with its 
presumed implications for third States. 

\n\n49. Hardly less helpful is the Court's reference to common Article 1 in 
the Nicaragua case. The Court, without interpreting its terms, observed 
that such an obligation does not derive only from the Conventions 
themselves, but from the general principles of humanitarian law to which 
the Conventions merely give specific expression. The Court continued 
that The United States [was] thus under an obligation not to encourage 
persons or groups engaged in the conflict in Nicaragua to act in 
violation of common Article 3 (Military und Paramilitary Activities in and 
against Nicaragua (Nicaragua v. United States of America), Merits, 
Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 1986, p. 114, para. 220). 
But this duty of abstention is completely different from a positive duty 
to ensure compliance with the law. 

\n\n50. Although i certainly am not in favour of a restricted interpretation
of common Article 1, such as may have been envisaged in 1949, i simply 
do not know whether the scope given by the Court to this Article in the 
present Opinion is correct as a statement of positive law. Since the Court 
does not give any argument in its reasoning, I do not feel able to support 
its finding. Moreover, i fail to see what kind of positive action, resulting 
from this obligation, may be expected from individual States, apart from 
diplomatic démarches. 
\n\n51. For al1 these reasons i felt compelled to vote against operative sub- 
paragraph (3) (D).  

